# 1. Creating conditions to produce positive effects in communities and diffe…

[[focal_point:paulina.jimenez@undp.org]]

[[year:2022]]

[[type:learningplan]]

[[datasources:citizen-generated data]]
[[datasources:participatory observation]]
[[datasources:self-ethnography]]
[[methods:Co-creation]]
[[country:Ecuador]]
[[latlng:-1.4262414736102795,-78.77228231120488]]
## Learnings on your challenge

> What are the top 5 key insights you generated about your frontier challenge during this Action Learning Plan?

1. Creating conditions to produce positive effects in communities and different actors is probably the best contribution an organization like UNDP can make. That is, success stories, impacts and results, is never a consequence of individual efforts, less so of "technical expertise". Impact and transformation are possible with multiple actors by creating room for interaction amongst actors with desire and intention for change. Thus, our role is to put provoke those conditions. It is about leveraging transformation in the hands of the most affected.

2. This intervention served to provoke alliances and reactivate local response networks.

3. A new principle of ethics should be incorporated beyond non-malifecence. Field work involves getting in touch with cases of material and inmaterial vulnerability. We can not go back to our office work without reporting it, without creating protocols of report and response.

4. Full compensation or repair must be family-centered. There is not one way of repairing families, instead actions must be taylored-made. This activity was a way of repair for many families: being heard, having taken their case seriously, and having room to vindicate justice where important contributions expressed by families.

5. Caring requires self-care. When working with vulnerability, team must also have care practices to engage with communities in risk, poverty, violence or any form of vulnerability.

> Please paste the link(s) to the blog(s) that articulate the learnings on your frontier challenge.

https://www.ec.undp.org/content/ecuador/es/home/blog/2022/flores-en-el-aire--rutas-de-memoria---in-justicia-y-respuesta-co.html


> Did you experience any barriers or bottlenecks when impacting the system, working on your frontier challenge respectively?

We did a lot with little budget.  As solutions mapper, I was able to map one of the routes in one city, but had to deploy a team to other two locations. The team is activist, so they were committed to the activity beyond a procurement relationship. They movilized local networks for accomodation and movilized in car- not flights. Therefore, this activity became an articulator of activists, organizations, who saw value in mapping memory and injustice routes.

 

The risk of re-victimizing was high and we had two main measures to avoid it: a) ensure voluntary participation b) use rituals and care kits- include moments of non-rationality, but of empathy that enabled families to then, articulate their demands, their memories and vindications.

> For this frontier challenge, how much of your time did you dedicate to the stages in the learning cycle? Please make sure that your answers adds up to 100%.


<div class="group">


> Sense


</div>



<div class="group">


> Explore


</div>



<div class="group">


> Test


</div>



<div class="group">


> Grow


</div>

## Data and Methods

> Relating to your types of data, why did you chose these? What gaps in available data were these addressing?

Georeferencing data on OSM was was important because we parted from the idea that every experience/knowledge is situated, it is embedded in a territory and context.

We used data generated by families- from self-ethnography, interviews, to learn about a different dimension of feminicide, other than statistics. We wanted to give families the opportunity to narrate feminicide/loss putting life in the center (not death), and therefore, the routes contain memories that are alive and actions that persist until today in search of justice.

> Why was it necessary to apply the above innovation method on your frontier challenge? How did these help you to unpack the system?

Social cartography (I could not add this to the previous question). It was important to practice situated narratives by walking together. Itineraries were defined by families themselves. They guided each route.
## Partners

> If applicable, what civil society organisations did you actually work with and what did you do with them?

-Fundación Aldea (deployed in the team; contributed mapping local organizations and implementing activity)

-Casa María Amor (Violece shelter- they had contact with families; participated in walks, activated local response for vulnerable cases)

-Nuevos Horizontes (Local organization; contacted us with families, participated in walks, activated local response for vulneralbe cases)

-Red FAVIVE- Families association that was reactivated with this intervention

-Federación de Mujeres Sucumbíos- Participated in route in Lago Agrio; held together initial event against violence.

-Spotlight initiative (UN agencies and government agencies are using results- this will become new cycle)

> If applicable, what private sector partners did you actually work with and what did you do with them?

Fiscalía (the first was a visited point and officers were invited to walk with us and listen to families.

Relating to your answers above: who of the partners listed were new and unusual partners for UNDP, and what made them special?

All civil society organizations (mentioned above)

If applicable, which UN internal partners did you actually work with and what did you do with them?

UNFPA- currently including the contents of this intervention in training to journalists.
## End

> Please upload any further supporting evidence / documents / data you have produced on your frontier challenge that showcase your learnings.
