# 2023 Sudan Learning plan

[[focal_point:basma.saeed@undp.org]]

[[year:2023]]

[[type:learningplan]]

[[datasources:stakeholder engagement]]
[[datasources:qualitative data]]
[[datasources:qualitative interviews]]
[[datasources:deep interviews]]
[[methods:Micro Narratives]]
[[country:Sudan]]
[[latlng:15.980242310859168,29.9354015675362]]

## Learnings on your challenge

> What are the top key insights you generated about your learning challenge during this Action Learning Plan? (Please list a maximum of 5 key insights)

Climate is not a priority in active conflict

> Considering the outcomes of this learning challenge, which of the following best describe the handover process? (Please select all that apply)

- Other

> Can you provide more detail on your handover process?

There was no handover process beyond the preliminary research conducted into the CI design work after it was suspended following the suspension of UN operations in Blue Nile State.

## Data and Methods

> Relating to your types of data, why did you chose these? What gaps in available data were these addressing?

Gaining in depth understanding of how stakeholders perceive climate crisis. a standalone issue or one that is exacerbated by the protracted crises of the country.

> Why was it necessary to apply the above innovation method on your frontier challenge? How did these help you to unpack the system?

mainly to begin to understand the knowledge, attitudes and practices of stakeholders engaged on the issue. The plan was then to visualise these into KAP maps that will help us identify converging and diverging patterns across interest groups including UNDP.

## Partners

> Please indicate what partners you have actually worked with for this learning challenge.

<div class="group">

> Please state the name of the partner:

UNEP

</div>

<div class="group">

> What sector does your partner belong to?

</div>

<div class="group">

> Please provide a brief description of the partnership.

knowledge exchange

</div>

<div class="group">

> Is this a new and unusual partner for UNDP?

</div>

## End

> Please upload any further supporting evidence / documents / data you have produced on your frontier challenge that showcase your learnings.
