# Action Plan 2022 - Citizen Science 

[[focal_point:maria.veronica.moreno@undp.org]]

[[year:2023]]

[[type:learningplan]]

[[datasources:experiments]]
[[datasources:in-depth interviews]]
[[datasources:solutions mapping]]
[[datasources:in depth interviews]]
[[datasources:open access app]]
[[methods:Solutions Mapping]]
[[methods:Co-creation]]
[[methods:Citizen Science]]
[[methods:Behavioral Insights]]
[[methods:(Community) Asset Mapping]]
[[sdgs:4. Quality education]]
[[sdgs:11. Sustainable cities and communities]]
[[sdgs:13. Climate action]]
[[thematic_areas:governance]]
[[thematic_areas:innovation]]
[[thematic_areas:enviroment]]
[[country:Argentina]]
[[latlng:-35.37867944030587,-65.17307736953525]]
## Title

> Please provide a name for your action learning plan.

Citizen Science 
## Challenge statement

> Challenge type: If you are working on multiple challenges, please indicate if this is your "big bet" or "exploratory" challenge. 

Please note: we ask you to only submit a maximum of 3 challenges - 1x Big Bet, 2x Exploratory. Each challenge must be submitted individually.


> Challenge statement: What is your challenge? (Please answer in specific terms: "Our challenge is that...”.)

Citizen Science represents an innovative tool to promote development since it helps to strengthen activism in the territories, influence the inclusion of new issues on the public agenda, promote evidence-informed public policies, facilitate the co-creation of innovative solutions, and raise awareness on an issue or underpin behavioural changes. It provides evidence for policy formulation and innovation to address problems, and it generates new information, everything with less effort from public officials. This information, generated by people with different backgrounds and interests, is more plural and diverse. The participatory nature of citizen science has very important governance implications. It allows citizens to express their opinions and points of view, giving policy-makers a more nuanced understanding of how they experience environmental issues. We value the participatory construction of knowledge, which can include the scientific system in the process, but transcends it. Community knowledge represents a source of evidence. We can all be involved in building a sustainable future, powered by collective evidence. In addition, citizen science can become an instrument to promote awareness about certain issues and/or behavioral changes in people.  

We focus on doing a complete learning cycle with exploration of forefront topics and collective intelligence on these topics, mapping more than 55 citizen science projects addressing different thematic areas, territories, among others. We also tested mapped solutions on two experiments to evaluate a hypothesis based on these solutions and scale them. On top of this, we are developing a portfolio of actions associated with the learning cycle which were carry out in parallel using the lessons from the cycle.  

> Background: What is the history of your challenge? What is causing or driving it? Who is involved? How does the current situation look like? What undesired effects does it produce?

During the COVID-19 pandemic, in 2020 we saw the opportunity to work with citizens and scholars, both in Argentina and the United Kingdom. This allowed us to coordinate the delivery of 14 sensors to participants who had a special circulation permit during the COVID-19 lockdown. By attaching the sensors to their bicycles, participants measured air pollution in the Autonomous City of Buenos Aires as they moved around the city on their bikes. The data obtained were used by the Ministry of the Environment and Sustainable Development of Argentina and the Government of the Autonomous City of Buenos Aires. From that moment on, we supported the expansion of air measurements by distributing sensors in other cities along 2021. 

A mapping of citizen science solutions in collaboration with the Argentine Ministry of Science, Technology, and Innovation (MINCYT, by its Spanish acronym). This course of action resulted in the inclusion of this topic on the Ministry's agenda, as well as the creation of a National Citizen Science Program, in which we are part of its Advisory Committee. This collaborative approach proved to have such an impact that the Minister also announced its expansion along two main areas. First, citizen science experiences will be set up at the most significant national science, technology, and art fair, which can be attended by thousands of people during a weekend. The second area refers to the development of a specific line of solutions mapping to identify projects related to ancestral knowledge.   

The 55 projects mapped proved that citizen science can have a variety of expressions, not limited to certain issues, strategies, approaches, or SDGs. These may involve a wide range of projects including people concerned about dengue fever sending photos of mosquitoes and their breeding sites to produce real-time collaborative maps; cyclists carrying low-cost sensors to measure air quality as they go about their usual routes; professional researchers partnering with organized communities to carry out socio-environmental surveys, among other possibilities.  

Framed in this loop and portfolio of citizen science, we tested two environmental citizen science solutions, in partnerships with two organizations and four local governments. The experiments showed the potential of this approach to address this problem. The first was an initiative to separate household waste to evaluate its effects on the commitment and predisposition of people to care for the environment. We conducted this experiment in November 2021 and we will analyse its results throughout 2022. The second experiment conducted in March (co-designed along 2021) was a crowdsourcing experience in aquatic ecosystems, using a mobile app that creates georeferenced environmental quality indicators. This sought to learn about the effects of citizen science on environmental governance, on increasing the quantity and quality of information obtained, and on promoting innovation in local environmental policies. In all three cities where the app was deployed, it helped collect valuable information about the state of their aquatic ecosystems. In addition, we obtained qualitative evidence of greater coordination across government areas to work on these policies. In the city where citizens took part in the mapping (using the app), the resulting data reflected a greater diversity of views and experiences on the natural environment.  

On Citizen Science Day in Argentina, we launched a social media campaign and article with an organization that works on scientific dissemination (they call themselves a web lab). It reaches a very active community of people from different backgrounds with more than 100,000 followers. On the same day, we spoke at workshop at the Cultural Center of Science in Argentina, sharing our journey on citizen science with a focus on the mapping findings.  

We appeared on an awarded TV show of scientific outreach La Liga de la Ciencia [The Science League], broadcasted by TV Pública, a channel reaching every corner of our country, and talked about the mapped projects. There, we celebrated that the solutions mapping will be part of a new segment of the show which will explain all the different citizen science projects identified and will include interviews with the project leaders in their territories.   ·           

We shared our experience on citizen science at an international workshop “Perspectives and Policies to steer Science, Technology and Innovation for the SDGs”organized by the University of Sussex, UCL, UKRI, etc. We focused upon the acceleration of development through citizen science. 

 We publish knowledge products that are longer and deeper than our blogs: o   Citizen Science: exploring its trends and its role in sustainable development. o   Citizen Science and Collective Participation: lessons learned from the first edition of the environmental citizen science solutions mapping. o   Citizen Science Solutions Mapping Cards.   By working on citizen science, we want to bring the projects closer to decision-makers, highlighting the potential of collaborative, innovative and economical data collection and analysis. We affirm that citizen science can provide inputs to public policy, and we aim at showing citizen science in an agile way. 

> Quantitative evidence: What (official) data sources do you have on this challenge that better exemplifies the importance and urgency of this frontier challenge? You can add text, a link, or a picture.


<div class="group">


> 

The following indicators stand out from the projects mapped in the first edition: i) Over 15,000 people have participated or are participating in these initiatives, ii) Although there are still no specific promotion mechanisms for these types of projects, the main financing source for the initiatives is the public sector through 3 government science and technology agencies and 8 national universities, and iii) The most recurrent Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) associated with these initiatives were Good Health and Well-being (21%), Sustainable Cities and Communities (19%), Life on Land (13%) and Quality Education (11%). Link: https://www.undp.org/es/argentina/publicaciones/mapeo-de-soluciones-ciencia-ciudadana-argentina Also, as part of the exploration, we found that in Argentina, there are more than 20 academics with extensive experience who actively work on citizen science projects with an emphasis on environmental and social issues. 



</div>


> Qualitative evidence: What weak signals have you recently spotted that characterizes its urgency? Please provide qualitative information that better exemplifies the importance and urgency of this frontier challenge. You can add text, a link, or a picture.


<div class="group">


> 

During the exploration, relevant weak signals were spotted, such as: the use of artificial intelligence for greater speed and efficiency in the analysis of information, the use of gamification to encourage participation and affordable low-cost and easy-to-develop sensors. We made an effort to build knowledge from qualitative data extracted from the interviews and focus groups involving the key stakeholders engaged in the Citizen Science projects. We gathered data on air quality in one project using citizen science itself and created behavioral data as an output of one of our experiments.   During the solutions mapping, the qualitive evidence exhibited the following patterns regarding the motivations that drive people to participate in these projects: we believe that environmental issues are linked to people’s health and quality of life and that the implementation of citizen science projects is often coordinated, in practice, with educational communities. Other types of motivations are linked to the possibility of recording biodiversity, promoting conservation, or as a way of pursuing personal interests or claims that involve some type of activism. In terms of data, these projects enable us— through specific instruments— to collect data in a participatory manner and increase outreach; they use new technologies and allow access to data. In addition, they are based on collective construction and exchange. Hence, when the approach is local, participating communities are usually part of the research from the very definition stage of the research problem. The projects also often challenge people who are already working in the territories (from fishermen to professional photographers), and they are called upon to participate actively. These types of initiatives also usually include opportunities for exchange between scientists and the participating community.   Moreover, the implementation of citizen science projects is not free of tensions and challenges associated with: trust building processes; diversity of interests that may arise in the same territory/community; the possibility of understanding each other and generating horizontal spaces; the necessary considerations when calling on citizens to collect data; high costs of developing and updating technology; the sustainability of participation; scientific evaluation systems; expectations linked to mediation, and evidence as a factor that does not necessarily ensure the design of informed public policies.   The qualitative information generated for the experiment focused on the preconditions of the municipalities, it is how they approached environmental policies and specifically aquatic ecosystems. To gather these data, we developed specific tools and guides for in depth interviews and gathered information from different local sources. We conducted in depth interviews with the responsible of environmental areas of eight municipal governments. We then selected three from this pool to conduct the experiment. Here is a summary of the results of the interviews and the complementary information for these three selected cities. The municipalities interviewed to be included in the PreserVamos (WePreserve) project have mentioned, in general, that they have similar environmental issues, such as urban solid waste management, the effects of flooding in urban areas, green spaces and natural reserves management, and industrial impact. Strategies for obtaining drinking water from groundwater, and recreational, touristic, sporting, and fishing uses of water bodies were also mentioned. Surprisingly, some ecosystem services provided by watercourses were hardly or not mentioned at all. Beyond the shared management of water resources, at the moment, there is no comprehensive management that includes both the aquatic ecosystem, the surrounding terrestrial ecosystem, and the social components of the basins. Management policies of water resources are strongly linked to the claims of district residents, generally focused on visible sources of contamination.   https://www.ar.undp.org/content/argentina/es/home/library/hiv_aids/CiaCiudadanaAmbiental.html https://www.ar.undp.org/content/argentina/es/home/blog/2021/AccLabBlog8Eng.html https://www.ar.undp.org/content/argentina/es/home/blog/2021/AccLabBlogEng.html https://www.ar.undp.org/content/argentina/es/home/blog/2021/AccLabBlog2eng.html  

 https://www.undp.org/es/argentina/blog/simple-solution-complex-problem-citizen-science-environmental-policies-and-awareness https://www.ar.undp.org/content/argentina/es/home/blog/2021/AccLabBlog8Eng.htmlhttps://www.ar.undp.org/content/argentina/es/home/blog/2021/AccLabBlogEng.htmlhttps://www.ar.undp.org/content/argentina/es/home/blog/2021/AccLabBlog2eng.html https://www.undp.org/es/argentina/publicaciones/mapeo-de-soluciones-ciencia-ciudadana-argentina 


</div>


> Value proposition: What added value or unique value proposition is your Accelerator Lab bringing to solving this challenge? Why is it your Lab that needs to work on this challenge and not other actors within UNDP, other stakeholders in the country respectively? Why is it worth investing resources to this challenge?

The Co_Lab has been gaining significant experience, supported by different types of evidence and experiences, in the field of citizen science. Through its learning cycle and portfolio of actions, it will keep positioning itself both as a benchmark and as an articulator/facilitator within the national ecosystem. This process is promoting the growth of this innovative approach in Argentina. In particular, the Co_Lab has been able to work at the interface between citizen science and public policy with different actors and during 2022 intends to keep doing so. 


> Short “tweet” summary: We would like to tweet what you are working on, can you summarize your challenge in a maximum of 280 characters?

#CitizenScience promotes public policies based on evidence and more democratic and participatory societies and strengthens activism in the territories. @PNUDArgentina will join the launch of the #CitizenScience National Program and celebrate its recognition #acceleratorlabs 

## Challenge classification
## Partners

> Who are your top 5 partners for this challenge? Please submit from MOST to LEAST important and state Name, Sector and a brief description of the (intended) collaboration.


<div class="group">


> Please state the name of the Parter:

National Ministry of Science, Technology, and Innovation - Cities of Buenos Aires, Quilmes, San Antonio de Areco, Balcarce and Mercedes


</div>



<div class="group">


> What sector does our partner belong to?


</div>



<div class="group">


> Please provide a brief description of the collaboration.

The citizen science solutions mapping was co-created with the Argentine Ministry of Science, Technology, and Innovation (MINCYT).  This process began with exploratory interviews with key informants, field experts, who led us to specific leaders or projects to identify the first initiatives. We then conducted a search in gray literature—including technical reports, conference minutes, etc.—and also found new initiatives in the mass media and social media.  Along the way, we built and iterated our mapping cards where we included descriptions of the initiatives, the purpose of which is to systematize the information collected and enable comparisons. All the information was validated by the leaders of each of the initiatives. Now, the solutions mapping is currently growing collaboratively. In 2022, MINCYT aims to create a nationwide program of federal promotion of local citizen science. This program will finance citizen science projects; expand mapping and set up permanent initiatives monitoring, identifying opportunities, challenges and lessons learned at different stages, according to the diversity of participants and methodologies used; promote civil society participation in these types of initiatives; foster citizen science training, participatory research methodologies and other related areas of expertise; and encourage studies and research related to citizen science in Argentina to feed public policies in various areas of intervention. The experiment assessing the effects of citizen science in environmentally friendly predispositions and engagement with the environment was conducted in the city of Quilmes. We co-designed the action plan and the experiment with local officials, who also supported us throughout the implementation of the project. The same applies to San Antonio de Areco, Balcarce, and Mercedes. We conducted the experiment to assess the effects of citizen science in policy innovation, data generation and environmental governance in the three cities. We co-created the action plan with local officials who also took part in the experiment in the three cases. In 2022, we will continue our partnership with the National Ministry of Science, Technology, and Innovation and the cities of Buenos Aires, Quilmes, San Antonio de Areco, Balcarce and Mercedes, in the province of Buenos Aires, Argentina.



</div>



<div class="group">


> Is this a new and unusual partner for UNDP?



</div>



<div class="group">


> Please state the name of the Parter:

Researchers – Research Groups


</div>



<div class="group">


> What sector does our partner belong to?


</div>



<div class="group">


> Please provide a brief description of the collaboration.

Many of the projects that we mapped and subsequently experimented with are overseen by professional researchers who led citizen science projects. This means that we have a close connection with academic leaders who have been working to promote citizen science in Argentina. In addition, thanks to this strong connection, we have been invited to take part in, or have co-organized, conversations to promote citizen science in different fields.  Among these teams of researchers, there were two from La Plata and Buenos Aires Universities who oversaw two different solutions and led the design and fieldwork of both of the experiments conducted.  



</div>



<div class="group">


> Is this a new and unusual partner for UNDP?



</div>



<div class="group">


> Please state the name of the Parter:

Gato y La Caja – FARN / Fundación Ambiente y Recursos Naturales


</div>



<div class="group">


> What sector does our partner belong to?


</div>



<div class="group">


> Please provide a brief description of the collaboration.

Furthermore, collaborative actions were developed with non-traditional partners, such as El Gato y La Caja (a participatory group and a research, communication and design platform reaching hundreds of thousands of Spanish-speaking people, https://elgatoylacaja.com/). 


</div>



<div class="group">


> Is this a new and unusual partner for UNDP?



</div>

## Learning questions

> Learning question: What is your learning question for this challenge? What do you need to know or understand to work on your challenge statement?

How can we promote citizen science to showcase local environmental challenges and enrich policymaking simultaneously? Can citizen science be a means to promote citizen involvement and participation, and more generally democratic governance? Which are the effects of citizen science in the kind, amount and quality of data generated? Can citizen science be a means to foster policy innovation?  How does citizen science impact on environmentally friendly predispositions?  


> To what stage(s) in the learning cycle does your learning question relate?

- Sense
- Explore
- Test
- Grow

> Usage of methods: Relating to your choice above, how will you use your methods & tools for this learning question? What value do these add in answering your learning question?

The solutions mapping was co-created with the Argentine Ministry of Science, Technology, and Innovation. During 2022 we will keep receiving new citizen science projects to be mapped through its Argentina.gob website where they are registered, then an iteration process begins until the final citizen science card is published in our compilations as well as in the national website dedicated to citizen science.   In addition, both experiments were co-created along with partners from the four cities where they were conducted and the teams of scientists in charge of the solution tested, who were also hired as consultants to lead the fieldwork. https://www.ar.undp.org/content/argentina/es/home/blog/2022/AccLabBlog1ENG.html https://www.undp.org/es/argentina/blog/simple-solution-complex-problem-citizen-science-environmental-policies-and-awareness    

The experiential learnings of weighting domestic wastes allow us to give evidence on how people can be affected by these experiences regarding their engagement with the environment and their ability to develop environmentally friendly predispositions. The app to map aquatic ecosystems made it possible to gather information that allowed us to identify the amount and kind of data generated by a citizen science experience. It helps us to assess how this tool, along with citizen participation in local environmental policies, affects the willingness to adopt an innovation, and the strategies that local governments use to manage water resources. 

> Existing data gaps: Relating to your choice above, what existing gaps in data or information do these new sources of data addressing? What value do these add in answering your learning question?

To the best of our knowledge, beyond some initiatives of citizen science and scholarly research on the topic, there were no systematic endeavors to produce accurate systematized knowledge regarding local citizen science projects and the pattern underneath them. Citizen science is participatory by definition; however, the experiments gave a new meaning and allowed varying the participation of citizens in different experiences to single out its effects. We must take a good amount of time and resources to get information from direct sources. 

## Closing

> Early leads to grow: Think about the possible grow phase for this challenge - who might benefit from your work on this challenge or who might be the champions in your country that you should inform or collaborate with early on to help you grow this challenge?

We are working through a portfolio of actions to foster the growth of citizen science in Argentina. For those who have been developing citizen science projects, mainly based on their conviction and commitment, we  are promoting and supporting the creation of a national program that recognizes their work and allows them to compete for funds. This program is a significant milestone. Plus, we were able to work with local governments by means of alliances that allowed us to test and scale different citizen science experiences. These experiments we develop show that citizen science is a versatile approach to address complex problems in their different dimensions, individual and collective, behavioral, and public policy, from a systemic perspective. Thanks to these, we identified effects on citizen commitment to environmental issues, on innovation in environmental policy, on greater coordination between areas to address environmental issues, and on environmental governance.    

In 2022, we will be promoting those lines of action that stem from our alliance with the Ministry of Science, Technology, and Innovation as well as working to bring citizen science to public schools in the City of Buenos Aires with its Ministry of Education. This pilot project aims at promoting a School Citizen Science Program for primary and secondary schools that implies, in its different projects, instances of co-creation with the school community, through the following: the interaction of teachers and students with actors of the scientific and technological world, training workshops for teachers, students and technical assistants, and the analysis of the program adaptation to the school curriculum of each of the educational levels. 
