# Next Practices: A Digital Financial Inclusion R&D Agenda

[[type:publications]]

[[source:https://www.undp.org/acceleratorlabs/publications/next-practices-digital-financial-inclusion]]

[Original article published here](https://www.undp.org/acceleratorlabs/publications/next-practices-digital-financial-inclusion)


[[year:2025]]

[[date:APRIL 15, 2025]]

[[country:Null Island]]



nullwz SF —— accelerator FL oys3 ID] P| Ce he i —— Next practices for amore sustainable jablabeas CEN BSE N Ee nant An R&D agenda built by UNDP and partners Covering 113 countries in the Global Majority, including the majority of Least Developed Countries and Small Island Developing States, UNDP Accelerator Labs test, explore and create new value for people and planet. Through globally distributed research and development (R&D), the UNDP Accelerator Labs create value through experiments in hundreds of countries in the Global Majority. Bottom-up R&D means we map and learn from local experimentation across many sectors to point to where there is traction, what can be scaled and how innovation can accelerate sustainable development. What you will see in this document are “next practices” for digital financial inclusion: R&D activities ready to scale globally, future areas for collaboration and a theory of change to drive experimentation for SDG acceleration. Based on patterns we see across Africa, Latin America, Asia, Europe and beyond, these next practices demonstrate how digital financial inclusion can reduce poverty and promote prosperity. From Local Experiments to Global Value UNDP’s innovation network, the Accelerator Labs, has prototyped a new kind of R&D: learning from signals of change to see patterns that create global development intelligence. As we evolve into UNDP’s open, globally distributed R&D capability, we’ve built coalitions in three high potential niches to show new ways to accelerate job creation, entrepreneurship and sustainability: digital financial inclusion, food systems and circular economies. Visit https://www.undp.org/acceleratorlabs/globalpublications to learn more. >” for a more sustainable future An R&D_agenda for action Digital Financia Inclusion More than 1.4 billion people in the Global Majority do not have access to bank accounts. And yet, the demand for credit is massive—the credit gap for African small and medium-sized enterprises alone is US$330 billion. Our R&D agenda Financial inclusion creates access to useful and affordable financial products and services— transactions, payments, savings, credit and insurance. Technology is being used to deliver financial products and services more cheaply and to more people. But does this move us closer to a world without poverty? What needs to take place in order for digital finance to put more money in the pockets of rural women and men in poor countries? This is the question UNDP and partners are exploring through R&D. Digital Financial Inclusion While taking stock of the UNDP Accelerator Labs’ finance work across a hundred countries, a common trend emerged. Over two thirds of the Labs that were working on finance focused on financial inclusion facilitated by digital tools. Impact on financial inclusion is accelerated by: Local practices Digital tools are most inclusive when they're designed to support existing (good) practices and community knowledge. These practices tend to be endemic, through traditional practices like community saving or the use of local languages. Focus on community Digital tools also work well when people can access them close to where they live and work. The groups most underserved by finance—such as women, the elderly and low-income commu- nities—can greatly benefit from in-person support that helps them understand and use digital financial tools. Without it, digital financial services risk becoming exclusionary because it’s often easier and more profitable to serve existing users rather than to expand services to reach the poor. 5 Next practices for a more sustainable future Digital Financial Inclusion Our focus on digital financial sVaCO Ley CopUm sua nmoyexevaNCe UK ma Keyan work in nearly 20 Accelerator Labs across five regions. We support informal Pett ae] one ( Congo, Eswatini, Guinea, Morocco and Zambia. WaT eeu nities in Colombia, Congo, Egypt and Sudan. We engage with women in Argentina, Bolivia, Cape Verde, Morocco and Senegal. Helping people pay The DFI toolkit prototype showcases Lab work that helps people understand how to use financial Taio ot) o-oo derisk and certify. Helping people borrow Helping peop Helping people understand save Mauritius derisk certify a || The crux of our R&D agenda is a hypothesis for how digital financial inclu- sion connects to economic development. It’s an to) (oN IKe NVC OER) the question, “How does digital financial inclu- sion put more money in the pockets of rural PAE UUM tLe (ol te rae R&D We Mae dite bitys Digital financial inclusion can... ...unlock the latent value of networks and collectives ..serve as a contribution to economic development Through this hypothesis, we're suggesting that dig- ital financial inclusion can ela lead Me eae Celle PEL ve Cee Pee ae contribution to economic development. ...unlock new value or sources of income Digital Financial Inclusion Ba What do we need to learn to accelerate progress toward the SDGs? Leen aC rl CRs) R&D Eve abet Do digital questions airy catalyze access to other (financial) services? What are baal eRe LTe LL) A ecosystem a conditions for digital financial services? © How can alternative data sources Bios meNVi—) credit olty nla What new What does data PIS bolt) empowerment for can be digital financial wml cere services look with technology? a Digital Financial Inclusion R&D activities ready to scale Community-based lending 10 Tech-driven microloan monitoring Aweb tool developed by the UNDP Accelerator Lab in Cabo Verde sup- ports the monitoring of microloans. This data allows a quick analysis of each micro, small, and medium enterprises’ (MSMEs) position, and lists ones with non-compliance issues for faster action. The objective is to monitor microcredits, allowing the agents in charge of non-com- pliant loans to proactively propose solutions to the MSMEs affected. As a part of the solution, the Lab provided a physical customer service desk at the main street market in Cabo Verde, Sucumira. Digitizing community savings groups UNDP Sudan and UNDP South Sudan, powered by their Accelerator Labs, and the UNDP Africa Borderlands Centre, exper- imented with a migration of three sanduks—traditional savings and lending schemes among members—to digital platforms. This first-of-its-kind digital fintech sanduk group wallet, facilitated by a collaboration with mGURUSH, South Sudan’s main mobile money company, now reaches 1.6 million people in South Sudan. Next practices for a more sustainable future R&D activities ready to scale Microinsurance and payments Waste pickers and. microinsurance in Tanzania The UNDP Accelerator Lab in Tanzania, in partnership with the Taka ni Ajira Foundation, launched the Waste Banks initiative. This project not only collects daily waste data from pickers, but also creates accredit score matrix based on this data. TakaBima, developed with Jubilee Insurance Tanzania, is a microinsurance product designed specifically for informal waste pickers. As waste pickers collect more waste, they accumulate credit towards their insurance premiums, making it an accessible safety net. Payments at neighborhood stores in Argentina The Red Con Vos (“Network With You") is a network of neighborhood stores in Argentina, whose owners and managers own the necessary equipment for online payments and have been trained in how to help their fellow citizens complete different kinds of online adminis- trative processes. Residents gain the convenience of accessing digital payments; store owners charge a small fee for each transaction they facilitate and benefit from residents visiting their stores more often. a4 rr Potential R&D investments Rapid research What barriers are there to mobile wallet usage? Accelerator Labs in Cameroon, South Sudan and Zambia are conducting desk research and an ethnographic survey to help them understand barriers to and benefits of digital mobile wallet usage, e.g. remittances used to fund small businesses. What can we learn from com- munities that have delivered more financial services through wallets? Identify communities that use digital wallets more than others and learn from them, e.g. wallets used for lowering interest rates and increasing group savings in South Sudan. Solutions mapping What financial products and services are commonly built on mobile wallets? Identify use cases for digital wal- lets being used beyond payments, e.g., to deliver value added services like insurance. Do a comparison and analysis of results from an inclusion perspective. (mew service)/case study What are innovative ways to extend financing to small businesses? Explore how digital wallets are catalyzing access to working cap- ital financing, i Accelerator Lab in Colombia is developing an experiment to iden- tify barriers to financing access for MSMEs. results What ecosystem investments can catalyze the distribution of financial services? Adapt the SDG Digital Finance Ecosystem Assessment (or a similar assessment), which provides an in-depth understanding of the drivers that make a country digital finance ready in 10 countries. Compare and analyze the results from an inclusion perspective. For example, the Sustainable Finance Hub worked with the Accelerator Lab in Morocco to use data to help the Moroccan government understand where the gaps and opportunities for fi jal inclu- sion existed as input to its national development strategy. Digital Financial Inclusion How can alternative data sources improve credit assessment? Banks often won't lend to small businesses because they can’t properly assess risk. While alter- native data sources don't increase creditworthiness, they can help with assessment. For example, startups offering credit might use mobile phone or social media usage records, SMS patterns, etc. to inform a credit score. Potential R&D investments Experimentation What existing data sources can be used to improve credit scoring? Data is generated by payment systems such as mobile money transaction data from cash in, cash out (CICO) points and merchants buying goods with mobile money. Using this data could enhance the credit assessment process. What alternative data sources can be used creatively to improve credit scoring? For example, the Accelerator Lab in Trinidad and Tobago is exploring how non-traditional approaches to assessing credit risk can reduce exclusion. This includes exploring what sources will work in context; what is adoptable by institutions; and how easy it is to collect data (such as informal sector skills, unconventional assets like fruit trees, and intangible assets like specialized knowledge) that can be monetized. How can the use of alternative data improve financial behavior? There are apps that deliver financial education alongside its product or service. It might be useful to test whether alternative data that leads to better credit scoring coupled with education incentivizes better financial behavior, such as an increase in repayment rates and the use of savings and investment products. Next practices for a more sustainable future Potential R&D investments Solutions mapping & acceleration campaign What innovative digital financial services are gaining traction and driving inclusion? Launch targeted campaigns to accel- erate the mapping, adoption and/or scaling of inclusive digital financial services, mobilizing stakeholders and resources across the ecosystem. Prototyping & experimentation (adapting technology) Hackathon How can users’ distrust of finan- cial services be deconstructed? Accelerator Labs in Bangladesh, North Macedonia, Paraguay, Syria and Zimbabwe plan to host a global hackathon to determine how the use of digital financial solutions can be increased by decreasing distrust between communities and service providers, making digital financial services more accessible. How do you remove barriers to adapting tested technology to new markets? Explore the bottlenecks, e.g., policy and legal frameworks, cultural incompatibility, cost, etc. that constrain use. For example, the Accelerator Lab in Colombia is testing how to design a product that enables fintech factoring for SMEs (specifically small shops), using alter- native data. Prototyping & experimentation (testing last mile products and services) What can be done to extend access to products and services to underserved and excluded consumers, markets and communities? Identify markets with untapped, high potential and prototype/ experiment with new services in partnership with the private sector. For example, the Accelerator Lab in Uganda worked with Jumia Uganda to help informal market traders sell produce through its e-commerce platform during COVID-19. Digital Financial Inclusion What does data empowerment for digital financial services look like? There are opportunities for consumers to own their data and monetize it. Another dimension of data empowerment might be boosting creditworthiness by helping people better understand what might improve their credit scores, etc. 16 Potential R&D investments Solutions mapping What are best practices in consumer protection? Map examples of privacy, data protection and owner- ship, as well as literacy in digital financial services such as lending. For example, Buy Now, Pay Later (BNPL) loans enable consumption for consumers whose spend- ing power is constrained by inflation. But consumers may be confused by interest rates, misuse the loans and fall into indebtedness. Ethnographic research What are the key design guidelines for building prod- ucts that inform and empower? Research basic principles of data empowerment and how to operationalize them. For example, neobanking app Fingo prioritizes financial literacy as part of its service delivery. Experimentation What do products and services that allow consumers to monetize their data look like? Test out business models for consumers to own and sell their data, building on the hypothesis that data empowerment leads to access to credit. For example, the founder of tappi, an app that digitizes small and medium- sized businesses, advocates for consumers to own and monetize their data Next practices for a more sustainable future With thanks to these partners for shaping the Digital Financial Inclusion R&D agenda. Who did we engage to develop this R&D agenda? ow J Japan CENTER for Innovation FINANCIAL Cael Network INCLUSION ACCION GbE Cabinet Office $%, SUSTAINABLE @ eas FINANCE HUB (CGAP mastercard Nec 4 QOGMs. Open R&D relies on diverse voices and collaborative agenda- setting. Through online consultations, open knowledge exchanges and in-person workshops with partners across sectors and industries, we co-create a shared vision for future R&D. TONY BLAIR INSTITUTE FOR GLOBAL CHANGE By bringing together private and public actors, we identify key challenges and opportunities to build an R&D agenda that is informed by a global perspective, responsive to local needs, and focused on generating impactful solutions for a circular economy. With special thanks to founding investors, the Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation and Development of Germany (BMZ), and the Qatar Fund for Development (QFFD), together with Partners at Core for UNDP, and the Italian Ministry of Environment and Energy Security and the Japan Cabinet Office as action partners, the UNDP Accelerator Labs have steadily matured into an agile innovation network that turns learning into action for the Sustainable Development Goals. We're always looking for partners in our pursuits. If you are engaged in answering the questions presented here or are working on this topic, we want to hear from you! Write us at accelerator.labs@UNDP.org JOIN US! 48 Next practices for a more sustainable future accelerator labs Co-building the Accelerator Labs as a joint venture with: Empowering experimentation cooperation DEUTSCHE ZUSAMMENARBEIT QATAR FUND FOR DEVELOPMENT german a@poiillpbaggain UNDP Core Partners Action Partners zk sn N nesta @~-— wIESE GD) Sac HYUNDAI ‘enter for Music Ecosystems Cabinet Office UNDP Core Partners ‘e ee, 6h newcities DR Kba MANAGEMENT || ''


