# Next Practices: A Food Systems R&D Agenda

[[type:publications]]

[[source:https://www.undp.org/acceleratorlabs/publications/next-practices-food-systems]]

[Original article published here](https://www.undp.org/acceleratorlabs/publications/next-practices-food-systems)


[[year:2025]]

[[date:2025-03-27T15:45:00.000Z]]

[[country:Null Island]]



null\S accelerator a more Flo) SS UNDP sustainable ‘| P ee OT Ac Food Systems Covering 113 countries in the Global Majority, including the majority of Least Developed Countries and Small Island Developing States, UNDP Accelerator Labs test, explore and create new value for people and planet. Through globally distributed research and development (R&D), the UNDP Accelerator Labs create value through experiments in hundreds of countries in the Global Majority. Bottom-up R&D means we map and learn from local experimentation across many sectors to point to where there is traction, what can be scaled and how innovation can accelerate sustainable development. What you will see in this document are “next practices” for food systems: R&D activities ready to scale globally, future areas for collaboration anda theory of change to drive experimentation for SDG acceleration. Based on patterns we see across Africa, Latin America, Asia, Europe and beyond, we show the value of combining grassroots knowledge and AI to build sustainable food systems. From Local Experiments to Global Value UNDP’s innovation network, the Accelerator Labs, has prototyped a new kind of R&D: learning from signals of change to see patterns that create global development intelligence. As we evolve into UNDP’s open, globally distributed R&D capability, we’ve built coalitions in three high potential niches to show new ways to accelerate job creation, entrepreneurship and sustainability: digital financial inclusion, food systems and circular economies. Visit https://www.undp.org/acceleratorlabs/globalpublications to learn more. 2 Sen for a more sustainable future An R&D_agenda for action ood Systems Food is a primary human need. There can be no development without thriving food systems that can address that need in a secure and sustainable way, forever, leaving no one behind. Global food systems at the time of writing are in a state of disarray. Far from fully delivering on Sustainable Development Goal 2 of zero hunger, they leave hundreds of millions of people in a state of acute food insecurity, fueling grievances that can, and sometimes do, escalate into violence. For the rest of us, they do provide food security, but at very high costs for the human health and the natural environment - costs that amount to borrowing from the future and cannot be sustained for long. Meanwhile, food systems reproduce inequalities both between and within countries, with a large share of the value they produce captured by a small number of powerful actors. Systemic problems require systemic solutions. The white paper “Supporting Food Systems Transformation Towards Sustainability and Resilience”, unveiled in 2024, reorganized UNDP’s strategic approach to food systems, as well as its collaboration with other United Nations agencies such as the Food and Agriculture Organization, the World Food Programme, the International Fund for Agricultural Development, and other partners. UNDP argues for a holistic approach, which is well served by its whole-of-government and whole-of- society approach. Food Systems R&D in the UNDP Accelerator Labs focuses on areas where food systems can be made fairer and more resilient by learning from and with communities, with relatively small investments and in a relatively short time. This approach often implies set- ting out to learn about systemic issues by prototyping and testing components of their possible solu- tions, rather than attacking them head on. For example, the Labs’ R&D approach helps develop business models for food banks and soup kitchens to help food-insecure groups in context of relative food security—a tractable first step that yields learnings about the broader issue. It also tests differ- ent types of behavioral incentives to increase nutritional diversity in different contexts, solving for the local dimension while gaining valid insights in general. The Accelerator Labs’ use of partic- ipatory methods, rapid prototyping and iterative deployment of solu- tions implies a strong preference for open and often digital tech- nologies. For example, the climate resilience of a rural community can be improved in a few months by experimenting with methods of allo- cating the community's water based on simple sensors to measure soil humidity and collective intelligence to interpret the data. Systemic problems require systemic solutions. The UNDP Food and Agricultural Commodity Systems’ white paper “Supporting Food Systems Transformation Towards Sustainability and Resilience” pre- sents UNDP's strategic approach to food systems, as well as its collab- oration with other United Nations agencies such as the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), the World Food Programme (WFP), the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), and other partners. It argues for a holistic approach, which is well served by its whole-of-government and whole-of-society approach. Food Systems Overview of the UNDP Accelerator Lab Food Systems Work as of 2024 Increased food Data-driven access farming ee et nae ae | Sea iS Z Bosnia and Herzegovina Cabo Verde North Macedonia Self-sufficiency Sustainable Shaping markets supply chains mS a p 3. Egypt J{ £1 Salvador South Africa El Salvador South Africa Innovation Conflict challenges prevention | = i t Bosnia and Herzegovina Food Systems Five working hypotheses Against this background, the UNDP Accelerator Labs organized, in 2024, a bottom-up process to learn from country practice and identify directions for R&D with a high potential to accelerate food systems transformation. This led to formulating five working hypotheses for promoting sustainable agrifood systems. 01 02 03 Integrating farming and food traditions with context-specific technology can drive sustaina- ble development by building on local knowledge. The interconnectedness of cultural practices with food production and consumption creates leverage points for sys- tems change. Gender, generational and geo- graphic inequalities are built into the current food system but also produce constituencies keen on systems transformation. 04 05 Technological and policy innova- tions can alter the cost structure of the agrifood value chain to incentivize sustainable practice. Tapping into wasted and underutilized assets offers potential for creating sustainable food value, reducing waste while enhancing resource efficiency and economic inclusiveness. ecd theory of change Food systems can be made more fair and resilient by.. improving the position of women and youth in value chains... «to enhance economic, biological and cultural (eh RV aro ae The five working hypoth- eses led to a theory of change to guide an R&D agenda on food systems transformation, with three opportunities to boost their fairness and Ina System diversity serves as an indicator of success— Teale lee MS LC) tend to be more resilient and offer more agency to the people in them. «combining new technology, collective intelligence and traditional knowledge... creating value from food waste and underused ETT-5 a ee ast MCS Cm Tay tcaD) Cetera ity eed aCe) aks How can new technology, collective intelligence (olato Mn xe(ob aeRO N a knowledge work together? How can private sector actors align their business models with TEST a eal aker al eb eKel iid BUC ev Amite ( offers opportunities Blast PCR a iV learning, we've set out ten R&D questions. How can working with influencers transform food systems? ie What financial tools work for farmers? What works to better position women and Ul h da maa aloM Ce AUT oda b aad ie How can heirloom foods and crops drive new markets and farmers’ resilience? le Which circular business models enable good jobs and climate resilience in niche markets? What actions make food systems more circular and less carbon intensive? How can we make healthy food more accessible for vulnerable individuals and groups in relatively food- secure contexts? How can national structures for food supply and markets adapt faster to environmental disruption? OO Food Systems Combining new technologies, collective intelligence and traditional knowledge This opportunity space is about discovering and testing and combining techniques for producing, processing and distributing food. Combining new technologies, collective intelligence and traditional knowledge uses building blocks from scientific research, grassroots innovation and traditional and indigenous knowledge to make food systems fairer and more resilient. Some related activities could be: De-risk investment in fair and resilient food systems. Food systems transformation requires private investments, and investment entails risk. For example, farmers know that they could switch to climate-re- silient crops, but they are not sure whether the demand for those crops will be there when the harvest time comes. Bringing together the collective intelligence on different stake- holders could allow to reduce (by shaping consumer demand) share (by affordable insurance schemes and collective pro- duction arrangements such as cooperatives), and distribute risk across the value chain (via institutions such as contract farming) the associated risk. 10 Prototype non-conven- tional techniques for food production and processing. Prototypes and demonstrations of the simplicity and compet- itiveness of traditional and traditional-modern “hybrid” techniques are helpful in collect- ing more data and knowledge, as well as in encouraging adop- tion by farmers and other food industry actors. Test out ways to combine local knowledge and data with sci- entific knowledge. With mobile phones and simple sensors, rural communities can aggregate hyperlocal informa- tion into datasets and use them to make better decisions, for example on pest control inter- ventions or harvesting, building on lived experience and gener- ating local action. Map local foods and tra- ditional techniques in agriculture and look at them through new eyes. Some farming techniques that were all but abandoned with the advent of modern agriculture, like polyculture, turn out to be ecologically advantageous; some traditional foods and crops turned out to be both highly nutritious and climate-re- silient. There are doubtlessly many more we don't yet know about. Next practices for a more sustainable future R&D activities ready to scale Combining new technology, collective intelligence and traditional knowledge Drone and local knowledge-based pest control in Zimbabwe The UNDP Zimbabwe Accelerator Lab and Japanese technology company Pegara are working on technological solutions - like drones and soundwaves - to pest control. Combining them with traditional techniques, they can capture large numbers of quelea, a species of small bird which threatens small grain crops all across Africa but that, once captured, provides a valuable source of protein. Data collective for climate resilient agriculture in India The UNDP India Accelerator Lab prototyped DiCRA (Data in Climate-Resilient Agriculture), a collaborative digital public good to provide open access to key geospatial datasets relevant to climate-resilient agriculture. These datasets are curated and validated through the collaborative efforts of hundreds of data scientists and citizen scientists across the world. After successful testing, DiCRA was handed over to the National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development, the government of India’s main financial institution tasked with financing agriculture. a4 Food Systems Potential R&D investments Prototypes Innovation challenges Technologies such as AI and autonomous drones are becoming cheaper and more broadly accessible. Identify and prototype their potential use cases for reducing or replacing the use of pesticides and herbicides and also potentially attracting young people to farming practices. Solutions mapping Prototypes Testing the prototype Traditional, but orphaned, crops have a potential to create new markets. Inventory edible plants that are not part of global food systems; map their uses in traditional cultures. Consider how these uses could be unlocked again by applying food processing technologies, like transforming the stalks of human-edible plants such as sunflower into animal fodder. Solutions mapping Innovation challenges Prototypes Unconventional sources of proteins are becoming avail- able through resilient, fair and sustainable production processes. Find innovators working on new solutions for aquaculture and other methods for protein provisioning, and support them for validation and scaling. Next practices for a more sustainable future Potential R&D investments Surveys Design thinking workshops Prototypes Local food innovation challenges Data and digital tools can com- bine with the local and traditional knowledge of farming communi- ties to improve their agricultural practices. Build on the experience accumulated by the Accelerator Labs on collective intelligence for climate action and explore ways that farm- ers can create—and share with one another—locally relevant data. For example, information on soil humid- ity in individual fields allows the distribution of water more efficiently. Prototypes Interviews Citizen science Cold chains are one of the most greenhouse gases emissions inten- sive component of food systems. Implementing solar-powered refrig- eration or bio-insulating materials can provide effective solutions in off-grid areas and reduce food loss. Pilot alternative cold chain systems (e.g., solar refrigeration or dehy- dration) in rural areas and measure spoilage rates compared to tradi- tional cold chains; interview users to gather qualitative data on accessibil- ity and maintenance needs; collect data on energy savings and cost-ef- fectiveness over time. Gastronomy has a potential to shift consumer behavior in favor of fairer food systems. Engage with the actors of food culture (chefs, food bloggers and influencers etc.), and, with their help, explore the viability of local, traditional foodstuffs to sup- port a fair compensation of farmers and sustainable farming practices. Solutions mapping Prototypes Experiment Most farming technologies are developed for large-scale farms. Affordable small-scale farming and processing equipment can lead to higher productivity and reduce labor intensity, making smallholder farms more viable. Partner with local farmers and industrial designers to develop and test specific equipment, such as seeders or hand-operated processing machines, and track output changes; collect feedback from farmers regarding ease of use, maintenance and impact on labor requirements; measure effects on output and time saving; assess return on investment. 43 Food Systems Improving the position of women and youth in value chains Several successful prototypes have shown that the position of women and youth in value chains improves when farming communities move from simply growing crops to marketing and transforming them. This is often even more true for women within those communities, who are typi- cally tasked with post-harvest transformation. Processing, marketing and finance in food systems are often concen- trated and global: developing local and decentralized pro- cessing technology, short value chains and local access to the finance needed, unlocks new pathways to sustainable development in rural commu- nities. To address it, R&D can: a4 Test appropriate technologies and solutions for farming communities to process the crops they grow. Simple, robust technical solutions optimized for use in rural contexts carry the potential to bring process- ing close to where crops are grown. Local food processing can open new spaces for women and youth to participate in production, reduce wastage and greenhouse gas emissions associated with globalized value chains and allow rural communi- ties to capture a higher share of the value. Next practices for a more sustainable future Prototype forms of insurance that de-risk small farmers as they integrate crop process- ing as part of their business. Ethnographic analysis and quantitative simulations based on available data can help build financial products that are attractive to smallholder farmers and their fledgling transformation activities, while maintaining profitability. R&D activities ready to scale Improving the position of women and youth in value chains Risk insurance for small farmers in Ethiopia The UNDP Ethiopia Accelerator Lab is engaged in the development of an insurance product to shield small farmers against the risk of crop failure, made more acute by fluctuations in rainfall patterns associated with cli- mate change. Currently, few insurance companies provide micro-insurance. The implementations that have been tried were under shorter-term pro- grams that have never been taken to scale. The Lab is working closely with UNDP's Insurance and Risk Finance Facility: its role is to work with farm- ers, through surveys, co-creation and experiments, in order to design a product that can both be attractive for small farmers and achieve full sustain- ability for the insurer. Solar dryers and e-commerce in Malaysia The UNDP Malaysia Accelerator Lab has co-developed two technical solutions for and with rural commu- nities in Sabah. One is a food dryer, powered by renewable energy, opti- mized for use in tropical climates, and built with open-source technol- ogies to minimize costs. The other is a simple, local-language e-com- merce solution. Combining the two, these communities can now reach more distant markets with e-com- merce, and provide them with longer shelf life foodstuff thanks to the dryer. Women have taken the lead in operating the dryers and the e-commerce activities. 45 Food Systems What financial tools work for farmers? Small farmers—the great majority of all farmers, and those who grow most of the world’s food—have next to no access to credit and finance. R&D is needed to engineer financial products that are secure and viable both for small farmers and financial businesses supply- ing them. What works to better position women and youth in the value chain? Gender gaps persist in food systems. Nevertheless, the first results from R&D in UNDP are encouraging: when local food systems take on new functions (for example adding processing or e-commerce to growing crops), opportunities open for women and young people to gain better, more direct access to consumer markets, financial auton- omy and dignity. 16 Potential R&D investments Qualitative analysis and Experiments Design thinking workshops Agricultural informal work- ers—among which women are over-represented—are in a “poverty trap”: better training would increase their skills and income, but their income is too low to allocate time and money to it. To break the trap, assess training needs for informal workers; pilot a cash-for training program; track productivity improve- Digital tools offer opportunities to vendors in food markets—who are often women, and often part of the informal economy—to connect with customers and generate extra income. Support informal workers in addressing the challenges they face vis-a-vis the adoption of digital tools: take the time to learn about digital tools and design uses and workflow ments; measure changes in output that work for them. and income. Survey and Pilots time-use analysis Ethnographies and Interviews and interviews case studies Some food processing technologies have been observed to improve women's economic empowerment. Evaluate the impact of the adop- tion of processing technologies on women. In which cases do we see increased output, reduced process- ing time, income gains? Why? Agritourism has the potential to create economic opportunities for youth and women. Pilot an agri- touristic offer in regions frequented by tourists; monitor for farmers gaining access to higher added value markets, and for shifts in the social perception of farm work as low-prestige. Next practices for a more sustainable future Food Systems Creating value from food waste and underused assets One third of the food produced is lost and wasted; contemporary food systems provide 60% of the world’s calorie intake with just three edible plants—rice, maize and wheat—when Earth has 50,000. Much value can be created from food waste and underused assets. Food waste and orphan crops—well adapted to the environment they evolved in—have the potential to reduce the consumption of freshwater and chemicals; create market opportunities for local producers and small enterprises; and provide bet- ter access to healthy food for marginalized individuals and groups. To explore this solu- tion space, one could: Map food waste streams to enable circular food systems. Collecting food waste at the source (for example street mar- kets) opens opportunities for processing it back into food, or non-food products like livestock feed or bioplastics. Quantifying and mapping food waste streams puts these opportu- nities on the map for private sector investors and policy makers. Explore the nutrition and mar- ket potential of orphan and heirloom crops. The global market trend towards “eating local” offers inroads for reviving the traditional practices of making food from plants that are no longer grown or foraged, like enset in Ethiopia. Experiments with processing and preparing these plants, as well as innovative partnerships with chefs and private sector food transformation companies, can detect promising opportu- nities and hand them over to smallholder farmers and rural communities. Prototype circular products based on food waste. Many products can be manufactured from food waste. To be suc- cessful, they need to overcome some technological difficulties and attract market demand. Prototyping and quali-quan- titative market research can speed up their development and reduce their time-to-market. Next practices for a more sustainable future R&D activities ready to scale Creating value from food waste and underused assets Complementary products from fruit growing in Pakistan The UNDP Pakistan Accelerator Lab collaborates with the high-mountain communities of Hushe Valley, in the Himalayas, whose main cash prod- uct is apricot oil. The region produces high-quality apricots, cherries and other fruits and vegetables, that are consumed locally but are difficult to sell on the market because of the difficult logistics of getting the product to market before it spoils. Through successive prototypes, the local communities and the Lab sin- gled out transformed products that can be produced locally and have a longer shelf life than fresh produce, like jams and several types of herbal tea. The com- munities also created a "Made in Hushe” brand to carry women's handicraft and they were trained in e-commerce. Exploring the potential of citrus waste in North Macedonia The UNDP North Macedonia Accelerator Lab has created a Biohacking Lab in Skopje, with the mission to find creative solutions to the problem of the excess produc- tion of biowaste, which accounts for 45% of all waste produced in the city. The Biohacking Lab is hosted by high schools to better embrace open and participatory science and involve city residents in investigating biowaste. Early prototypes focus on large, fairly easy and cheap to collect waste streams, like citrus pulp and peels (reusable to produce citrus oils) and coffee residues from bars and restau- rants (reusable to produce candles with insect-repellent properties). 19 Food Systems How can heirloom foods and crops drive new markets and farmers’ resilience? Earth has over 50,000 edible plants, but just three of them (rice, maize and wheat) provide 60 percent of the world’s food energy intake. R&D is a good tool to explore the potential of heirloom foods and crops, some of which— like enset in Ethiopia—could be marketed as superfoods, or in connection to traditional cuisine. This opens up paths for farming communities to capture a higher share of the added value from food products. Which circular business models enable good jobs and climate resilience in niche markets? Food systems are a major employer and climate stressor. R&D is needed to reveal paths to their transformation that pursue multiple goals, including the generation of high-quality jobs (necessary to counteract the tendency of young people to abandon farming and move to cities en masse) and the shift to climate-resilient crops. How will small producers in the Global Majority serve consumers of fair- trade food? Potential R&D investments Innovation challenge Solutions mapping The production of animal fodder can use as inputs biowaste from growing human-edible crops. Identify grassroots innovations. Organize innovation challenges to validate and improve them. Mobilize agricultural research centers, private sector producers of fodder, and local actors (like farming cooperatives) as experts, to help secure the trust of farmers-innovators. Solutions mapping Prototypes Every country has heirloom foods and crops, which are suitable for human consumption but are not grown as cash crops. Since they are adapted for the local climate and soil, they tend to be resilient to supply-chain shocks (for example from conflict) and require less water and pesticides than non-indigenous plants. Some could become the next superfood. Identify market opportuni- ties for indigenous crops. An interesting specific case is medicinal plants: they can deliver additional sources of income to farming communities and, in fragile settings where access to modern pharmaceuticals might be inter- mittent, provide extra resilience. Next practices for a more sustainable future What actions make food systems more circular and less carbon intensive? A lot of food goes to waste in the journey—often very long—from the farm to the fork. R&D on food waste offers the opportunity to shorten food supply chains, boost self-sufficiency and local trade, and bring farm- ers closer to the consumer markets. Food waste also tends to appear in bulk (for example in street markets), where it is relatively easy to rescue. Potential R&D investments Innovation challenges Festivals and workshops Desk research Field research Surveys Heirloom and orphan crops and other foodstuff that currently are not traded on global markets, like food waste, are inherently local and could form the basis for a contri- bution to regional economies. Pilot initiatives that integrate food waste and orphaned crops into various value-added streams like local cui- sine, artisanal products, and tourism, assessing how these uses enhance regional identity; collaborate with the tourism and cultural sectors to foster festivals or workshops centered on these unique products, drawing visitors and building com- munity pride; conduct case studies of successful regional models can reveal strategies for branding and storytelling that reinforce cultural identity. (Geo) data analysis To make food systems circular, we need to know how much food waste there is, and where it is. Audit the economic potential of food waste streams and build a database of those streams. With it, prototype a design journey for new marketable products from food waste, with a view to making food systems more circular and creating good, green jobs. Prototypes Quantitative analysis Surveys With biodigesters, food waste can be repurposed, either as a renew- able energy source for rural areas or as a fertilizer. Pilot biodigesters, monitoring energy production and compost output; measure waste reduction after biodigestion; survey users on energy costs and fertilizer use to assess economic benefits. Solutions mapping Prototypes Experiments Inclusive and robust participa- tion of communities in local food systems innovation has potential to generate public goods, mak- ing innovation more diverse and enhancing social cohesion. Support local communities to set shared goals and exchange knowledge. Use participatory evaluation methods to document commu- nity involvement and innovation outcomes. Conduct focus groups to capture personal stories and reflections on the process and its impact on the community. Food Systems Increasing systems diversity Diverse ecosystems are more resilient than monocultures; a plurality of crops, food produce, food cultures and business models provide more opportunities—potentially also more security and more agency—to the women and men who grow, transform, distribute and prepare food. R&D activities to directly address system diversity include: Designing next-generation tools for dietary diversity for marginalized individuals and groups. There is considerable scope to upgrade the institu- tions commonly used to provide food to vulnerable groups, such as food banks, soup kitchens and schools for the most vulnerable in food secure countries. This requires better knowledge of how vulnerable individuals and groups interact with these institutions, so they can be designed with them, and not only for them. Ethnographic methods, experiments, behav- ioral insights and participatory evaluations can contribute to this knowledge. Enhancing traditional, sustain- able production techniques with technology. Many national and local food systems expe- rience pressure to abandon their traditional production techniques to increase their output of commodities that can be traded on the global mar- kets. Prototypes and collective intelligence have the potential to enhance those traditional production techniques with scientific knowledge and mod- ern technology, rather than replacing them with intensive agricultural methods. Accelerating the scaling of early successes in agritourism. Agritourism has emerged as a model whereby applying agroe- cological techniques aligns with business success. Despite suc- cess stories, difficulties remain in diffusion. Ethnographies and qualitative analysis in general can help see the big picture behind these difficulties and inform growth strategies. Next practices for a more susta: R&D activities ready to scale Increasing systems diversity Farmers market vouchers for dietary diversity in Paraguay The UNDP Paraguay Accelerator Lab experimented with providing low-in- come households with vouchers redeemable at their local farmers market. It then monitored these households’ food consumption over four weeks. As a result, the dietary diversity was significantly higher than that of the control group, proving that farmers market vouchers are a promising tool to increase access to nutritious food, and not just empty calories. This type of intervention also supports local vendors, often them- selves informal workers or members of vulnerable groups. Agritourism in Egypt The UNDP Egypt Accelerator Lab is developing a portfolio of interven- tions to develop agritourism. The idea is to leverage Egypt's substan- tial tourism flows as a market for high-quality, sustainable and fair agricultural products. Engaging in foresight activities with over 60 stakeholders from the Nile Delta region and from Cairo, the Lab concluded that agritourism can help create resilient livelihoods, especially benefiting vulnerable populations like women and youth, while also promoting climate-smart agricultural practices that preserve biodiversity. As an additional bene- fit, agritourism would enhance the range of experiences available to tourists visiting Egypt. 23 Food Systems How can we make healthy food more accessible for vulnerable individuals and groups in relatively food- secure contexts? Even in food-secure countries, there remain food-insecure individuals and groups. R&D activities can map their needs and experiment on how institu- tions such as soup kitchens, food banks and food vouch- ers can lift them into food security—and reduce waste in the bargain. How can national structures for food supply and markets adapt faster to environmental disruption? In many countries climate change and soil degrada- tion have outpaced the adaptive response of food systems: even a good decision can be useless if it arrives too late. R&D can help by speeding up the rate at which mean- ingful information reaches decision makers. Activities like prototypes, regulatory sandboxes, monitoring of real-time data from social media or Earth observa- tion, carry different signals; what they have in common is that they are all faster than indicators traditionally used in development policy. Potential R&D investments Surveys Ethnographies Design thinking workshops Experiments Prototypes Even in food-secure countries, there remain some individuals and groups that are food-insecure. Map food insecurity (some of which is likely to be hidden by stigma) with partici- pant observation and experiments. Develop models for institutions that can respond to those needs while making systems generally fairer and more resilient: examples can be food banks, food vouchers, edible gardens, local moonshots for growing more food locally, or cyclone-resilient hydroponics. Innovation challenges Partnerships for scaling New economic actors, such as startups, cooperatives and young companies have the potential to rejuvenate food systems, bringing new ideas and business models to an economic landscape polarized between a few giant conglomerates at the top and a great many family farms at the bottom. Find, validate and support new entrants. Desk research Ethnographies Stakeholder mapping and engagement Prototypes, pilots and consultation Sessions Citizen participation has the potential to make public food procurement and delivery systems, such as a school meals program, more inclusive and sustainable. Research cases where concerned citizens are involved in the process of monitoring procurement and delivery of food to public institutions, for example public schools. Explore how these procurement systems can benefit small-scale, low-envi- ronmental impact producers, while maintaining high quality and the satisfaction of beneficiaries; map good practices. Next, pilot programs in select public institutions to test different participatory monitoring designs and procurement criteria favoring local, sustainable suppliers. Monitor economic impacts, environ- mental footprint and food quality. Solutions mapping Experiments Collective intelligence workshops Agroecological methods, with their approach of being “light on the land,” have the potential to reduce the dependency of local food systems from imported agricultural inputs. In turn, this helps improve their resil- ience to supply chain shocks. Map and observe in depth farms that have adopted agroecological prac- tices, documenting input costs and sources. Apply collective intelligence methods and experiments to find out what works. 25 Who did we engage to develop this R&D agenda? 26 Open R&D relies on diverse voices and collaborative agenda- setting. Through online consultations, open knowledge exchanges and in-person workshops with partners across sectors and industries, we co-create a shared vision for future R&D. By bringing together private and public actors, we identify key challenges and opportunities to build an R&D agenda that is informed by a global perspective, responsive to local needs, and focused on generating impactful solutions for a circular economy. With special thanks to founding investors, the Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation and Development of Germany (BMZ), and the Qatar Fund for Development (QFFD), together with Partners at Core for UNDP, and the Italian Ministry of Environment and Energy Security and the Japan Cabinet Office as action partners, the UNDP Accelerator Labs have steadily matured into an agile innovation network that turns learning into action for the Sustainable Development Goals. We're always looking for partners in our pursuits. If you are engaged in answering the questions presented here or are working on this topic, we want to hear from you! Write us at accelerator.labs@UNDP.org UT Next practices for a more sustainable future With thanks to these partners for shaping the Food Systems R&D agenda. ZL Y Cabinet Office =) ( Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations © pegara Ne oI ye be) ts) ty FROM beh) 9 La Ky Tare é Sey Japan Innovation Network TheGlobal FoodBanking Network International Cooperative Alliance @ Slow Food’ Uganda Food And Agricultural DIE] commoaity systems accelerator labs Co-building the Accelerator Labs as a joint venture with: Empowering experimentation cooperation DEUTSCHE ZUSAMMENARBEIT QATAR FUND FOR DEVELOPMENT german @poiilpbdggain UNDP Core Partners Action Partners * sn N nesta o-— ®D HYUNDAI DIESE ‘enter for Music Ecosystems Cabinet office UNDP Core Partners ‘e ee, 6h newcities DR Kha MANAGEMENT || ''


