# Building a sustainable future through solar energy and bio gas

[[focal_point:salome.nakazwe@undp.org]]

[[year:2025]]

[[type:solution]]

[[sdgs:7. Affordable and clean energy]]
[[sdgs:9. Industry, innovation and infrastructure]]
[[sdgs:11. Sustainable cities and communities]]
[[thematic_areas:electricity]]
[[thematic_areas:energy]]
[[thematic_areas:solar energy]]
[[thematic_areas:solar]]
[[thematic_areas:solar power]]
[[country:Zambia]]
[[latlng:-13.460110018365599,27.7742123347968]]
[[gender:male]]

> Title of the innovation

Building a sustainable future through solar energy and bio gas

> Brief description of the innovation

The majority of the Zambian people to do not have access to electricity. And the few who have access experience load shedding and the tariffs are constantly increasing. Due to lack of access to electricity, load shedding and a constant increase of tariffs of electricity, Zambian forests have become victims. According to the World Bank (2019), Zambia continues to lose its forests and the vice is increasing rapidly. This is having an effect on climate change.

The solution to the above problems is solar energy and bio/natural gas. Due to high cost of solar energy products, the idea is to install the solar energy lighting system upfront for the customer. The customer will then be paying in installments. The solar energy system will come with a smart prepaid meter. The smart meter will be connected to the mobile banking network. If the client wants to have access to the solar power, he/she has to buy units using the phone through mobile banking services. The units will be sent via sms. Enter those units in the smart prepaid meter, and the solar energy system will automatically unlock, giving power to the client.
Charcoal and firewood are the main source of extracting heat energy in Zambia. These has led to deforestation. Will solve this problem by producing bio gas. Bio gas is cheap and more efficient than charcoal. We aim to make gas stoves conventional for the majority of Zambians by making it easily accessible.

The vision is to install solar energy system in a home to light it, and install the gas stove, completely removing it from the national power grid.

> Do you have a prototype for your innovation?

- no

> Commercial Viability of the Innovation

First, this is how the innovation will generate income. The solar energy system will come with a smart prepaid meter. The smart meter will be connected to the mobile banking network. If the client wants to have access to the solar power, he/she has to buy units using the phone through mobile banking services. The units will be sent via sms. Enter those units in the smart prepaid meter, and the solar energy system will automatically unlock, giving power to the client. In short, clients will be paying for the solar energy system in installments using smart prepaid meters and mobile banking which is very popular in Zambia. Furthermore, We will invest in solar farms. Power generated by the solar farms will be sold to the national grid. 
Second, we will be producing bio gas. The bio gas will be packaged in gas cylinders and sold to the customers at the distribution centers-preferably at the markets and refueling stations. Gas stoves will be sold also. 

Our potential customers are the people living in the suburbs and those living in rural areas. The challenge prize will assist us by gaining technical support and networking.

Zambia continues to lose its forests and the vice is increasing rapidly. This is having an effect on climate change. Worsening impacts of climate change include frequent and intense droughts and floods have led to food, water and energy insecurity. Clearing forests for charcoal and firewood are the major drivers of deforestation. The innovation will curb deforestation.

> Technical Feasibility

The design is simple. The firm will bear the high upfront cost of installing the solar energy system at the client's house. The solar energy system will come with a smart prepaid meter. The smart meter will be connected to the mobile banking network. If the client wants to have access to the solar power, he/she has to buy units using the phone through mobile banking services. The units will be sent via sms. Enter those units in the smart prepaid meter, and the solar energy system will automatically unlock, giving power to the client. In short, clients will be paying for the solar energy system in installments using smart prepaid meters and mobile banking which is very popular in Zambia.
For the heating services, the firm will have distribution points of the bio gas cylinders. The distribution points will be at the refueling stations, markets and shopping malls. Distribution points will be used to refill the gas cylinders for the customers.

> Anticipated Social Impact

We are all feeling the negative impact of climate change. Worsening impacts of climate change include frequent and intense droughts and floods have led to food, water and energy insecurity.  The innovation will help curb climate change and build a sustainable future by investing in solar energy and bio gas.

> Name of the Innovator

Benjamin Chilufya

> Age

- 19-35

> Note

Thematic area tags generated using: Maarten Grootendorst, KeyBERT: Minimal keyword extraction with BERT. 2020, https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4461265.
