# Community Based Development Tourism

[[focal_point:temidayo.ibitoye@undp.org]]

[[year:2023]]

[[type:solution]]

[[sdgs:16. Peace, justice and strong institutions]]
[[sdgs:17. Partnerships for the goals]]
[[thematic_areas:innovation]]
[[thematic_areas:Peace Building]]
[[thematic_areas:Community development]]
[[country:South Africa]]
[[latlng:-28.99507093082864,25.083135268083065]]
[[country:Namibia]]
[[latlng:-22.12924663866726,17.21113319741009]]
[[country:Botswana]]
[[latlng:-22.185772321029273,23.798986732813958]]
[[consent:https://kgalagaditransfrontierpark.co.za/]]

> Solution

Community Based Development Tourism

> Innovation Solution Description 

Community Based Development Tourism

> Qualitative Results of the Innovation

1. Improved cross-border relations: The establishment of the park has improved relations between the governments of Botswana and South Africa, who jointly manage the park. This has had a positive impact on social cohesion in the border areas of the two countries, as it has led to increased cooperation and communication between communities on either side of the border.
2. Increased tourism: The Kgalagadi Transfrontier Park has become a popular destination for tourists, both from within southern Africa and from overseas. This has created economic opportunities for local communities, as businesses such as lodges, restaurants, and tour operators have sprung up to cater to the growing number of visitors.
3. Job creation: The establishment of the park has also created jobs for people living in the border areas, both in the tourism industry and in conservation efforts. This has had a positive impact on social cohesion, as it has provided opportunities for people from different communities to work together towards a common goal.
4. Conservation efforts: The park's conservation efforts have helped to protect animals and their habitats, which has had a positive impact on the natural environment in the border areas. This has also helped to promote social cohesion, as people from different communities have come together to support conservation efforts.

> Quantitative Result of the Innovation

1. Increase in number of Tourists: The number of visitors to the KTP has increased steadily over the years, from 17,357 in 2002 to 62,054 in 2019.
2. Increased revenue: The park generates significant revenue for the three countries. In 2019, the revenue generated by the park was approximately R84 million (South African Rand).
3. Job Opportunities: The KTP has created job opportunities for local communities. In 2019, the park employed 474 people, of which 225 were from local communities.

> Border Area

Border between the 4 countries

> Region

Southern Africa

> Organization

The Kgalagadi Trans frontier Park
Address: South Africa-Botswana Border
Web: 
Email:reservations@kgalagaditransfrontierpark.co.za
Tel: + 267 (3) 918 1774
