# Health Center Management System

[[focal_point:salome.nakazwe@undp.org]]

[[year:2025]]

[[type:solution]]

[[sdgs:3. Good health and well-being]]
[[sdgs:8. Decent work and economic growth]]
[[thematic_areas:health]]
[[thematic_areas:reduce]]
[[thematic_areas:storage]]
[[country:Zambia]]
[[latlng:-13.460110018365599,27.7742123347968]]
[[gender:female]]

> Title of the innovation

Health Center Management System

> Brief description of the innovation

The main intention of introducing Health center management system is to reduce the manual work at Health center counters and to help patients not to wait on the queue for long. Every sort of task is performed by the system, such as registering different types of people (i.e. employees , students and others) ,enquiries, complaints etc. reducing much paper work and burden of file storage. Also the information is right available for the officials and executives wherever they require. The system also facilitates the pharmacist  to enquire about the drugs and about the  stock to be ordered and about the expiry date .

> Do you have a prototype for your innovation?

- no

> Commercial Viability of the Innovation

Health Center Management System is a beneficial to health centers. The  system is used to enter the patient  details and to enter the details about  the health center and the details about the in-patient and out-patient  in detail  and about the reports of the patients . This system represents  the patient by the  OP number and this is main  criteria how the patient is provided by the free services . The drug information and the specifications is also provided in this Health Center Management System.
The incomes will be generated by developing the system in zambian hospitals.
To develop a Health Center Management system, we take care of patient registration, drug information  and concerns such as drug  enquiries and complaints.

> Technical Feasibility

The  system is used to enter the patient  details and to enter the details about  the health center and the details about the in-patient and out-patient  in detail  and about the reports of the patients . This system represents  the patient by the  OP number and this is main  criteria how the patient is provided by the free services . The drug information and the specifications is also provided in this Health Center Management System.

> Anticipated Social Impact

Health Center Management system will help patients and other people not to take long on the queues which will also reduce the transmission of covid 19 pandemic.

> Name of the Innovator

Rabecca Malika

> Age

- 19-35

> Note

Thematic area tags generated using: Maarten Grootendorst, KeyBERT: Minimal keyword extraction with BERT. 2020, https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4461265.
