# Improving the livelihood for every member of our local community through agro and piggery farming

[[focal_point:salome.nakazwe@undp.org]]

[[year:2025]]

[[type:solution]]

[[sdgs:2. Zero hunger]]
[[sdgs:9. Industry, innovation and infrastructure]]
[[sdgs:12. Responsible consumption and production]]
[[thematic_areas:innovation]]
[[thematic_areas:livelihood]]
[[thematic_areas:farming]]
[[thematic_areas:community]]
[[country:Zambia]]
[[latlng:-13.460110018365599,27.7742123347968]]
[[gender:male]]

> Title of the innovation

Improving the livelihood for every member of our local community through agro and piggery farming

> Brief description of the innovation

The innovation intends to boast the agro and animal farming in the northern part of Zambia, to show that there is potential to improve the livelihood in agro and animal farming if given an opportunity

> Do you have a prototype for your innovation?

- no

> Commercial Viability of the Innovation

Income I will be generated by selling our produce to the local buyer at a cheap price. They will take as advantage buy more of our produce in order to satisfy their customers. The major income will be generated from the agro produce like tomato, onion etc. For these produce animal manure will be used as the fertilizer that will help to reduce the soil acidity and return the soil fertility.
The targeted market is the butcheries and restaurant, even other big supermarkets

> Technical Feasibility

This innovation is feasible because all the raw materials will be generated at the same area. Manure will be used  as fertilizer, and farm residues and soya beans as feed for piggery. Which will help us to increase the capacity and engaging in other developmental activity. 
Were other stock needed will be purchased.

> Anticipated Social Impact

Their is ever shortage of vegetables and foods that contains proteins and fats, more especially the nutrients have mentioned at last. They are sold at high price of which many can't afford. 
From the above overview, our innovation is relevant in such away that, we will minimize our input and maximize our output. This will help us to produce more and sell at a cheaper price which will  give an opportunity to every member of our community to afford

> Name of the Innovator

Joackim Cheka

> Age

- 19-35

> Note

Thematic area tags generated using: Maarten Grootendorst, KeyBERT: Minimal keyword extraction with BERT. 2020, https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4461265.
