# TrashCo

[[focal_point:salome.nakazwe@undp.org]]

[[year:2025]]

[[type:solution]]

[[sdgs:3. Good health and well-being]]
[[sdgs:6. Clean water and sanitation]]
[[sdgs:13. Climate action]]
[[thematic_areas:waste management]]
[[thematic_areas:municipal]]
[[thematic_areas:waste]]
[[thematic_areas:waste to energy]]
[[thematic_areas:reduce]]
[[country:Zambia]]
[[latlng:-13.460110018365599,27.7742123347968]]
[[gender:male]]

> Title of the innovation

TrashCo

> Brief description of the innovation

TrashCo is a start up company aimed on providing waste management services which include trash collection, garbage disposal, and waste-to-energy facilities. The prime objective is to reduce the amount of waste materials and to avert potential health and environmental hazards. The company is currently servicing residential customers and plans on expanding to operate at commercial, industrial and municipal level.

> Do you have a prototype for your innovation?

- no

> Commercial Viability of the Innovation

From a commercial or financial perspective, costs recovery from households in the form of fees paid for trash collection is generally very poor. On the other hand waste collection can be more lucrative, but rarely covers costs. sanitary landfills are expensive. Where disposal of solid waste is carefully planned, revenues can be generated by managing waste effectively. this will be done through: [1] recycling of scrap metal, paper, glass, plastics, and cardboards which is a large industry in many developed countries. [2] Composting-organic waste can be used to create compost to defray methane gas production and  can also be used as inputs for fertilizer, construction materials, and even animal feed. [3] Energy- properly dried and sorted waste can provide a potent and green source of fuel for some industrial processes, in particular power generation and cement kilns. These energy sources may qualify as renewable energy, and therefore may provide access to carbon credits, or other subsidies designed to encourage green activities.

> Technical Feasibility

The main goal is to reduce and eliminate adverse impacts of waste materials on human health and the environment to support economic development and superior quality of life and recover resources which have the potential for further usefulness. Implementations include: [1] Identifying potential waste  streams in industrial, agricultural, residential and commercial aspects of the community. [2] Considering waste collection strategies and how waste will be separated into different waste streams before being removed from the sites. [3] Determine location or criteria for waste management sites, locations for waste staging, storage and decontamination activities. [4] Potential waste management facilities. What reuse, composting, recycling, treatment and disposal to use.

> Anticipated Social Impact

Improved waste management will lead to better quality of life by helping reduce pollution caused by waste and harmful chemicals and greenhouse gasses that are often released from plastics and other recyclable materials in land fill sites. Recycling will also promote health and sanitation which is one of the biggest concerns when it comes to disposal of waste because festering and rotting waste is a breeding ground for bacteria. In turn this will improve community health by protecting the environment and ensuring physical safety which will promote a healthy economy.

> Name of the Innovator

George Mwanjisi

> Age

- 19-35

> Note

Thematic area tags generated using: Maarten Grootendorst, KeyBERT: Minimal keyword extraction with BERT. 2020, https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4461265.
