# -        Collective intelligence workshop on how to identify the main chall…

[[focal_point:omar.agodim@undp.org]]

[[year:2023]]

[[type:learningplan]]

[[datasources:Sensor & sensor network data]]
[[datasources:Financial transaction data]]
[[datasources:Citizen data]]
[[datasources:literature review and grey documents analysis]]
[[datasources:experiments]]
[[datasources:participatory observation]]
[[datasources:direct interviews]]
[[datasources:behavioral insights]]
[[datasources:in-depth interviews]]
[[datasources:collective intelligence]]
[[methods:Smart Cities]]
[[methods:Crowdfunding]]
[[methods:Collective Intelligence]]
[[methods:Behavioral Insights]]
[[country:Morocco]]
[[latlng:29.84169214305202,-8.396435049672846]]
## Learnings on your challenge

> What are the top 5 key insights you generated about your frontier challenge during this Action Learning Plan?

-        Collective intelligence workshop on how to identify the main challenges on water scarcity -        Using open source tools to develop digital solution for smart territories -        Organizing a smart city caravan to meet innovators in different regions of Morocco -       Introduction of new generation equipement to helps entrepreneurs to test ideas - Concept like "Do It Yourself" are important and can lead city to a smarter development of territories

> Please paste the link(s) to the blog(s) that articulate the learnings on your frontier challenge.
NA

> Did you experience any barriers or bottlenecks when impacting the system, working on your frontier challenge respectively?

Difficulties to identify the real challenges Difficulties to convince stakeholders, partners, etc. that Smart Territories is a frontier challenge in Morocco

> For this frontier challenge, how much of your time did you dedicate to the stages in the learning cycle? Please make sure that your answers adds up to 100%.


<div class="group">


> Sense


</div>



<div class="group">


> Explore


</div>



<div class="group">


> Test


</div>



<div class="group">


> Grow


</div>

## Data and Methods

> Relating to your types of data, why did you chose these? What gaps in available data were these addressing?

When developing smart cities, we think that there are 2 main types of data that are relevant : - Data that could be generated by technologies; - Data that could be generated by discussing with beneficiaries and counterparts.

> Why was it necessary to apply the above innovation method on your frontier challenge? How did these help you to unpack the system?

To be able to identify the right challenges to address.
## Partners

> If applicable, what civil society organisations did you actually work with and what did you do with them?

Women CSOs, cooperatives

> If applicable, what academic partners (and related institutions) did you actually work with and what did you do with them?

MOHAMMED V UNIVERSITY IN RABAT

> If applicable, what private sector partners did you actually work with and what did you do with them?

Maroc Numeric Cluster FIWARE Kiwi Emerging Business Factory

> If applicable, what government partners (and related institutions) did you actually work with and what did you do with them?

Ministry of National Land Management, Urban Planning, Housing and Urban Policy : we are building a partnership. An Initiation Plan is under validation to develop a "Smart City Upgrade" Programme
## End

> Please upload any further supporting evidence / documents / data you have produced on your frontier challenge that showcase your learnings.
