# Air Quality Monitor Digital Public good

[[focal_point:elias.mouawad@undp.org]]

[[year:2023]]

[[type:learningplan]]

[[datasources:Spatiotemporal data]]
[[datasources:Sensor & sensor network data]]
[[datasources:Open data]]
[[methods:Smart Cities]]
[[methods:Prototyping]]
[[methods:Minimal Viable Product (MVP)]]
[[methods:Data Visualisation]]
[[methods:Collective Intelligence]]
[[sdgs:3. Good health and well-being]]
[[sdgs:11. Sustainable cities and communities]]
[[sdgs:13. Climate action]]
[[thematic_areas:access to information]]
[[thematic_areas:air pollution]]
[[thematic_areas:clean cities]]
[[thematic_areas:climate change]]
[[thematic_areas:community empowerment]]
[[thematic_areas:digitalhealth]]
[[thematic_areas:urbanization]]
[[thematic_areas:community engagement]]
[[thematic_areas:data collection]]
[[thematic_areas:climate resilience]]
[[country:Lebanon]]
[[latlng:33.920093267470115,35.87983051612946]]
## Title

> Please provide a name for your action learning plan.

Air Quality Monitor Digital Public Good
## Challenge statement

> Challenge type: If you are working on multiple challenges, please indicate if this is your "big bet" or "exploratory" challenge. 

Please note: we ask you to only submit a maximum of 3 challenges - 1x Big Bet, 2x Exploratory. Each challenge must be submitted individually.


> Challenge statement: What is your challenge? (Please answer in specific terms: "Our challenge is that...”.)

Our challenge is that data on air quality for climate change, urbanism, and health is scarce in Lebanon. Hence, does building an environmental monitor as a digital public good help in the adoption and scaling of such solutions? 

> Background: What is the history of your challenge? What is causing or driving it? Who is involved? How does the current situation look like? What undesired effects does it produce?

Air quality data in Lebanon is almost non-existent. all previous attempts by UNDP and others constantly failed due to their scale, their recurrent costs, and their target audiences. These solutions failed to move the collection and use of the data from a scientific exercise of monitoring, to more practical use cases feeding into health, urbanism/urban planning &amp; citizen engagement. in addition, Lebanon is becoming ever more reliant on informal power generated by power generators spread across the territory, but more densely in urbanized areas, without any environmental and health safeguards. This is adding tremendous health risks on people who are having to choose between their health and accessing electricity. Although, Lebanon has witnesses a spike in conversion to renewable solutions (mostly Solar PV Panels) these solutions are still restrictive to; people who can afford them and who have access to spaces to install them in. This means these solutions are restricted to wealthier households, leaving those in need no option but to rely on generators. Another underlying element is that these solutions are individual ones, and are causing tensions between residents of buildings, especially in urban areas. so, if solutions can be found on an individual basis, the generators' fumes are affecting everyone. The assumption that if we generate and use the data from this open-source, low-cost digital public good we can prompt collective action. in addition, making this monitor a DPG will help scale it faster and ensure its sustainability at the least cost possible. 

> Quantitative evidence: What (official) data sources do you have on this challenge that better exemplifies the importance and urgency of this frontier challenge? You can add text, a link, or a picture.


<div class="group">


> 

The estimated average number of premature deaths in Lebanon as a result of air pollution due to fossil fuels was 2,700 in 2018 – that is, at a rate of 4 deaths per 10,000 people


</div>


> Qualitative evidence: What weak signals have you recently spotted that characterizes its urgency? Please provide qualitative information that better exemplifies the importance and urgency of this frontier challenge. You can add text, a link, or a picture.


<div class="group">


> 

The complete failure of the national utility and the constant demand for power. 


</div>


> Value proposition: What added value or unique value proposition is your Accelerator Lab bringing to solving this challenge? Why is it your Lab that needs to work on this challenge and not other actors within UNDP, other stakeholders in the country respectively? Why is it worth investing resources to this challenge?

We're building the solution in-house, in open-source, making it widely available and encouraging it gets adopted by other stakeholders while making the data available through a web portal. These principles are the opposite of any other solution tried before by UNDP or others. Those usually relied on very expensive, proprietary systems that were transferred to line ministries to sustain, and kept the collected data semi-public. the cost of our solution is estimated to be 10% of that of previously used systems. Furthermore, the solution will be used by other UNDP projects, especially the climate change and sustainable transport teams to help them continuously collect data, and plan routing and measure impact respectively. 

> Short “tweet” summary: We would like to tweet what you are working on, can you summarize your challenge in a maximum of 280 characters?

Building an open-data, open-source, low-cost, air quality monitor as a digital public good to make the invisible, visible and to spur collective action for healthier &amp; happier communities
## Challenge classification
## Partners

> Who are your top 5 partners for this challenge? Please submit from MOST to LEAST important and state Name, Sector and a brief description of the (intended) collaboration.


<div class="group">


> Please state the name of the Parter:

UNDP Environment Program


</div>



<div class="group">


> What sector does our partner belong to?


</div>



<div class="group">


> Please provide a brief description of the collaboration.

The climate change and sustainable transport teams will support the roll-out of the solution and use the data to continuously collect data, and plan routing and measure impact respectively


</div>



<div class="group">


> Is this a new and unusual partner for UNDP?



</div>

## Learning questions

> Learning question: What is your learning question for this challenge? What do you need to know or understand to work on your challenge statement?

how can we collect air quality data in the cheapest fastest way possible, across the territory and make it available for people?

> To what stage(s) in the learning cycle does your learning question relate?

- Explore
- Test

> Usage of methods: Relating to your choice above, how will you use your methods &amp; tools for this learning question? What value do these add in answering your learning question?

Build a prototype of the air quality monitor, and provide data visualisations (of the AQ index) and use them for collective action. for now, the plan is to roll-out the prototype in urban areas, and looking into offering as a UNDP offer for cities and municipalities we work with. 

> Existing data gaps: Relating to your choice above, what existing gaps in data or information do these new sources of data addressing? What value do these add in answering your learning question?

Access to air quality data (general, or localized) are missing in Lebanon. collecting air quality data and providing air quality indexes, would be used to: inform citizens and prompt their actions, monitor pollution levels from different sources, and hence inform planning and mitigation measures. 

One use case is using the data compiled to inform bus routes planning in a way to reduce their emissions in crowded urban neighbourhoods. 

In addition, collecting data on pollutants, light, noise will help inform critical urban design interventions aiming to reduce negative impacts. 

Futhermore, this data will allow the Government to have a benchmark to use in reporting on the National AQ Strategy indicators.  
## Closing

> Early leads to grow: Think about the possible grow phase for this challenge - who might benefit from your work on this challenge or who might be the champions in your country that you should inform or collaborate with early on to help you grow this challenge?

Universities, community centers, environment urban planning and transportat NGO's &amp; Ministry of Environment. 
