# Application of Metagenomic Next Generation Sequencing to Detect and Identify Pathogens in HIV posi…

[[focal_point:salome.nakazwe@undp.org]]

[[year:2025]]

[[type:solution]]

[[sdgs:3. Good health and well-being]]
[[thematic_areas:children]]
[[thematic_areas:health]]
[[thematic_areas:vaccines]]
[[thematic_areas:diagnosis]]
[[thematic_areas:treatment]]
[[country:Zambia]]
[[latlng:-13.460110018365599,27.7742123347968]]
[[gender:male]]

> Title of the innovation

Application of Metagenomic Next Generation Sequencing to Detect and Identify Pathogens in HIV positive and exposed children with severe pneumonia

> Brief description of the innovation

One of the priorities of the AU-EU High Level Policy Dialogue on Science Technology and Innovation under the Joint Africa-EU Strategy is accelerating achievement of the Health Targets of the MDGs. One of these targets is is to reduce child deaths by two-thirds.
Pneumonia is still the most important infectious cause of mortality among children under the age of 5 in developing countries despite the widespread use of antibiotics and the roll out of vaccines against the two bacterial causes Streptococcus pneumoniae and Haemophilus influenzae [1]. HIV positive and exposed children are most impacted from pneumonia with only 25% of children with HIV surviving to the age of 5 [2]. The gold-standard for diagnosis of pneumonia, microbial culture, is time consuming, results often arriving too late to inform on life-saving changes to treatment. Metagenomic sequencing-based diagnostics could provide rapid diagnosis informing critical treatment decisions. We will establish the metagenomic nanopore sequencing diagnostic, developed and validated, by our collaborator Justin O'Grady [3]. We will then conduct an observational cohort study on 400 children admitted with severe pneumonia, to evaluate the accuracy and potential impact of this diagnostic approach and establish whether mixed infections and molecular markers are associated with poor outcomes.

> Do you have a prototype for your innovation?

- no

> Commercial Viability of the Innovation

Establishing and marketing better diagnostics will generate income for me and my organisation through the fact that these types of tests will be requested and conducted by us for doctors on behalf of pneumonia patients who are our ultimate target market in this case but in general our Healthcare providers lack reliable diagnostics that can inform the treatment and management of pneumonia patients. Particularly children.

> Technical Feasibility

The proposed innovation is built on an existing platform for rapid whole genome sequencing it however goes further by using proprietary bioinformatics pipelines to generate useful actionable data from the sequence data generated by next generation sequencing platforms to give doctors rapid pathogen detection and a rapid way to identify antimicrobial resistance profiles of pathogens so they can tailor treatment to get better patient outcomes.

> Anticipated Social Impact

It will improve the mortality rate of patients with pneumonia particularly mortality rates in children. Pneumonia is the number one infectious cause of death in children under 5.

> Name of the Innovator

John Tembo

> Age

- 36-49

> Note

Thematic area tags generated using: Maarten Grootendorst, KeyBERT: Minimal keyword extraction with BERT. 2020, https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4461265.
