# LPG Multi Utility Stove

[[focal_point:anilg@gian.org]]

[[year:2022]]

[[type:solution]]

[[sdgs:7. Affordable and clean energy]]
[[thematic_areas:cooking]]
[[thematic_areas:environment friendly]]
[[thematic_areas:environmental ecosystem]]
[[thematic_areas:clean cooking]]
[[country:India]]
[[latlng:22.91300071248592,79.57888726082322]]
[[country:India]]
[[latlng:22.91300071248592,79.57888726082322]]

> What is the name of the solution holder? (main contact person, if multiple)

Mr. S. J. Joe

> What is the address and preferred way to contact the solution holder?

Kozhikode (Calicut), Kerala

> What is the purpose of the solution? (brief problem & solution description)

Purpose In the conventional stoves available in the market, both fuel and energy liberated from it are lost in a various manner. Mr. Joe developed an innovative stove model to achieve a higher ratio between energy utilized and energy released (Combustion ratio). Technical details The system consists of a burner (nozzle-78), boiler, water storage vessel, steam cooking vessel, water regulator, tubings connecting vessel, Insulating materials, asbestos sheets, glass wool, etc.  Burner: The burner is  same as  conventional one, but it is located 8 cm below the top of the stove. It is centrally placed at the left half of the stove.  Boiler: Boiler is a ring-shaped chamber and is located right above the burner with its inner wall surrounding the air space above the burner. The boiler is equipped with a number of copper tubes, which stick into the container space from the inner brass wall of the boiler. The inside ends of copper tubes are closed water tight and outer ends are opened. This arrangement ensures better and uniform heat transmission into the water body kept in the boiler. Also, the top surface of the boiler is tapered to confirm with the flow pattern of the flame facilitating direct contact with it. Water storage vessel: Conical shape 9 cm high tapering from 8 cm to 4 cm made of steel. This is connected to the boiler bottom through the copper tube with a regulator fixed in between. This is placed at the centre of the stove.  Steam cooking vessel:  A 21 cm diameter, 11.5 cm high vessel made of steel centrally placed at the right half of the stove. A stream outlet from the boiler is fixed at his bottom with a nozzle arrangement. Water regulator:  This is fixed at the right side of the stove. It regulates water input to the boiler.  Tubings: Water vessels and boiler are connected with the copper tubes. The copper tube connecting boiler top and the cooking vessel is insulated with asbestos rope.  Insulating materials: The boiler is insulated by asbestos sheets. The steam outlet tube is insulated by asbestos rope. The cooking vessel is insulated by 2 cm thick layer of glass wool surrounding it.  Working: The fuel gas from the burner burns off as it goes upward. As the flame reaches the bottom surface of the vessel above almost complete combustion of the fuel would takes place. The extra heat generated by better and usual heat loss (radiation, convection) would be absorbed by the boiler and steam is produced from it. The steam formed at the top of the boiler is then taken to the cooking vessel using insulated copper tubes. In this vessel, steam-based cooking can be done.  i.e., to make IDLIES it would take only 6 to 8 minutes.  Water supply to the boiler can be regulated depending on cooking requirements. Thus along with regular cooking steam-based cooking can also be done without using extra fuel. Arrangements for tapping boiled water for making TEA, COFFEE, etc. can also be made.  Benefits It is cost-effective as well as fuel-efficient stove. The steam generation initiates within 10 minutes of lighting the burner. 

> Is this solution a prototype or product?

- Prototype
