# Textile Waste

[[focal_point:gokcetuna@hotmail.com]]

[[year:2022]]

[[type:learningplan]]

[[datasources:qualitative interviews]]
[[datasources:focus group]]
[[datasources:informal conversations]]
[[methods:Prototyping]]
[[methods:Proof of concept]]
[[methods:Design Thinking]]
[[methods:Co-creation]]
[[methods:Behavioral Insights]]
[[sdgs:11. Sustainable cities and communities]]
[[sdgs:12. Responsible consumption and production]]
[[sdgs:13. Climate action]]
[[thematic_areas:textile]]
[[thematic_areas:textile recycling]]
[[thematic_areas:waste reduction]]
[[country:Turkey]]
[[latlng:39.06108059786125,35.167239386750786]]
## Title

> Please provide a name for your action learning plan.

Encouraging textile reuse through creation of an online marketplace
## Challenge statement

> Challenge type: If you are working on multiple challenges, please indicate if this is your "big bet" or "exploratory" challenge. 

Please note: we ask you to only submit a maximum of 3 challenges - 1x Big Bet, 2x Exploratory. Each challenge must be submitted individually.


> Challenge statement: What is your challenge? (Please answer in specific terms: "Our challenge is that...”.)

Our challenge is that some of the textile waste generated by large manufacturers currently get sent to recycling facilities and some end up in landfill. On the other hand, small and sustainable manufacturers struggle to find high-quality materials that they can reuse. There is a need to create ways for big and small-scale/sustainable manufacturers to cooperate and transfer waste materials from the former to the latter.

> Background: What is the history of your challenge? What is causing or driving it? Who is involved? How does the current situation look like? What undesired effects does it produce?

Turkey has a long history of textile production and there is an established textile industry which also exports to other countries. However, there is no effective large-scale waste management strategy or a system in place which results in large amounts of textile waste being burned or partially recycled. These are not environmentally-friendly methods. In addition, fast fashion is a growing trend globally and also in Turkey. Consumers get rid of items of clothing in ways that are not responsible/sustainable. Clothes swapping and second-hand markets are not so common in the country. There are signs of small-scale efforts among textile manufacturers, however, it cannot currently keep up with the pace of waste production.

> Quantitative evidence: What (official) data sources do you have on this challenge that better exemplifies the importance and urgency of this frontier challenge? You can add text, a link, or a picture.


<div class="group">


> 

When domestic waste and industrial waste are evaluated together, we see that approximately one million tons of textile waste are generated in Turkey every year most of which ends up in municipal landfills. For instance, data show that the total amount of textile waste found in just 6 provinces is over 244 thousand tons.


</div>


> Qualitative evidence: What weak signals have you recently spotted that characterizes its urgency? Please provide qualitative information that better exemplifies the importance and urgency of this frontier challenge. You can add text, a link, or a picture.


<div class="group">


> 

The applications we received for the 2021 UNDP AccLab Social Innovation Challenge indicate that textile waste is indeed a major problem and all sorts of actors are interested in finding a solution. The number of solutions we received on dealing with textile waste indicates a clear gap in the market. Further discussions with textile companies and the national association (TGSD) representing them confirmed this finding.


</div>


> Value proposition: What added value or unique value proposition is your Accelerator Lab bringing to solving this challenge? Why is it your Lab that needs to work on this challenge and not other actors within UNDP, other stakeholders in the country respectively? Why is it worth investing resources to this challenge?

AccLab’s solution to this challenge involves testing an online platform which would bring large and small-scale/sustainable manufacturers together and enable transfer of what is considered waste material from the former to the latter. Through our connections, we will set up a test platform and try it with a small group of manufacturers who are willing to take part in an experiment. Based on the findings, the CO may be willing to scale it up.

> Short “tweet” summary: We would like to tweet what you are working on, can you summarize your challenge in a maximum of 280 characters?

AccLab Turkey’s experiment on textile waste will bring together industry’s biggest players and sustainable small-scale manufacturers on an online platform where one’s waste will become the other’s resource.
## Challenge classification
## Partners

> Who are your top 5 partners for this challenge? Please submit from MOST to LEAST important and state Name, Sector and a brief description of the (intended) collaboration.


<div class="group">


> Please state the name of the Parter:

TGSD (Turkish Clothing Industry Association)


</div>



<div class="group">


> What sector does our partner belong to?


</div>



<div class="group">


> Please provide a brief description of the collaboration.

TGSD (Turkish Clothing Industry Association) is a strategic partner to develop and test the platform. They will find at least 5 large textile producers to take part in the experiment.


</div>



<div class="group">


> Is this a new and unusual partner for UNDP?



</div>



<div class="group">


> Please state the name of the Parter:

Joon and This is Mana


</div>



<div class="group">


> What sector does our partner belong to?


</div>



<div class="group">


> Please provide a brief description of the collaboration.

Joon and This is Mana are both micro enterprises in textile sector and will represent the 'buyer' side in the experiment. These SMEs are among the winners of the 2021 UNDP AccLab TR Social Innovation Challenge.


</div>



<div class="group">


> Is this a new and unusual partner for UNDP?



</div>



<div class="group">


> Please state the name of the Parter:

Yariyo


</div>



<div class="group">


> What sector does our partner belong to?


</div>



<div class="group">


> Please provide a brief description of the collaboration.

Yariyo is an online platform where unwanted items are given away. They will host the experiment for 3 months and if it is successful a dedicated platform will be developed for textile waste.


</div>



<div class="group">


> Is this a new and unusual partner for UNDP?



</div>

## Learning questions

> Learning question: What is your learning question for this challenge? What do you need to know or understand to work on your challenge statement?

If we offered an easy-to-use accessible online platform to large textile manufacturers, would they advertise their waste/unwanted materials for small-scale sustainable manufacturers to buy rather than send them to landfill and/or recycling plants? And would sustainable manufacturers buy the advertised materials at the advertised price?

> To what stage(s) in the learning cycle does your learning question relate?

- Test

> Usage of methods: Relating to your choice above, how will you use your methods & tools for this learning question? What value do these add in answering your learning question?

We will collect data from large textile manufacturers and sustainable manufacturers to understand what their unique needs are and how they can be convinced to take part in a scheme which adds extra work to each party's daily workload. When the needs and motivations are clear, we will develop a basic prototype and test it with those taking part in the experiment.

> Existing data gaps: Relating to your choice above, what existing gaps in data or information do these new sources of data addressing? What value do these add in answering your learning question?

These are the questions we can address by using those data sources: 1. Is using an online platform a burden for large manufacturers? 2. What sort of materials do sustainable manufacturers need? 3. What sort of waste materials do large manufacturers provide?
## Closing

> Early leads to grow: Think about the possible grow phase for this challenge - who might benefit from your work on this challenge or who might be the champions in your country that you should inform or collaborate with early on to help you grow this challenge?

The experiment will be conducted on an existing online platform (Yariyo.com) and if it succeeds, a dedicated online platform for textile waste can be developed and launched in 2022. One of the main partners of the dedicated platform will be TGSD (Turkish Clothing Industry Association). Potential beneficiaries are small-scale and large-scale manufacturers.
